UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET 



eo f q r n 



Senate Select Committee on 




Committee Study of the Central Intelligence Agency’s Detention and 

Interrogation Program 




Foreword by Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairman Dianne Feinstein 

Findings and Conclusions 
Executive Summary 



Approved December 13, 2012 
Updated for Release April 3, 2014 
Declassification Revisions December 3, 2014 



TOP SECRE 




O FORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



Foreword 

On April 3, 2014, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence voted to send the 
Findings and Conclusions and the Executive Summary of its final Study on the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program to the President for declassification 
and subsequent public release. 

This action marked the culmination of a monumental effort that officially began 
with the Committee’s decision to initiate the Study in March 2009, but which had 
its roots in an investigation into the CIA’s destruction of videotapes of CIA 
detainee interrogations that began in December 2007. 

The full Committee Study, which totals more than 6,700 pages, remains classified 
but is now an official Senate report. The full report has been provided to the White 
House, the CIA, the Department of Justice, the Department of Defense, the 
Department of State, and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence in the 
hopes that it will prevent future coercive interrogation practices and inform the 
management of other covert action programs. 

As the Chairman of the Committee since 2009, 1 write to offer some additional 
views, context, and history. 

I began my service on the Senate Intelligence Committee in January 2001 . I 
remember testimony that summer from George Tenet, the Director of Central 
Intelligence, that warned of a possible major terrorist event against the United 
States, but without specifics on the time, location, or method of attack. On 
September 11, 2001, the world learned the answers to those questions that had 
consumed the CLA and other parts of the U.S. Intelligence Community. 1 

I recall vividly watching the horror of that day, to include the television footage of 
innocent men and women jumping out of the World Trade Center towers to escape 
the fire. The images, and the sounds as their bodies hit the pavement far below, 
will remain with me for the rest of my life. 

It is against that backdrop - the largest attack against the American homeland in 
our history - that the events described in this report were undertaken. 



1 For information on the events at the CIA prior to September 1 1 , 2001 , see the Final Report of the National 
Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States (9/1 1 Commission) and Office of the Inspector General 
Report on CIA Accountability With Respect to the 9/1 1 Attacks. 

Page 1 of 6 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



Nearly 13 years later, the Executive Summary and Findings and Conclusions of 
this report are being released. They are highly critical of the CIA’s actions, and 
rightfully so. Reading them, it is easy to forget the context in which the program 
began - not that the context should serve as an excuse, but rather as a warning for 
the future. 

It is worth remembering the pervasive fear in late 2001 and how immediate the 
threat felt. Just a week after the September 1 1 attacks, powdered anthrax was sent 
to various news organizations and to two U.S. Senators. The American public was 
shocked by news of new terrorist plots and elevations of the color-coded threat 
level of the Homeland Security Advisory System. We expected further attacks 
against the nation. 

I have attempted throughout to remember the impact on the nation and to the CIA 
workforce from the attacks of September 11, 2001. I can understand the CIA’s 
impulse to consider the use of every possible tool to gather intelligence and remove 
terrorists from the battlefield, 2 and CIA was encouraged by political leaders and 
the public to do whatever it could to prevent another attack. 

The Intelligence Committee as well often pushes intelligence agencies to act 
quickly in response to threats and world events. 

Nevertheless, such pressure, fear, and expectation of further terrorist plots do not 
justify, temper, or excuse improper actions taken by individuals or organizations in 
the name of national security. The major lesson of this report is that regardless of 
the pressures and the need to act, the Intelligence Community’s actions must 
always reflect who we are as a nation, and adhere to our laws and standards. It is 
precisely at these times of national crisis that our government must be guided by 
the lessons of our history and subject decisions to internal and external review. 

Instead, CIA personnel, aided by two outside contractors, decided to initiate a 
program of indefinite secret detention and the use of brutal interrogation 
techniques in violation of U.S. law, treaty obligations, and our values. 

This Committee Study documents the abuses and countless mistakes made 
between late 2001 and early 2009. The Executive Summary of the Study provides 



2 It is worth repeating that the covert action authorities approved by the President in September 200 1 did not provide 
any authorization or contemplate coercive interrogations. 

Page 2 of 6 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



a significant amount of new information, based on CIA and other documents, to 
what has already been made public by the Bush and Obama Administrations, as 
well as non-governmental organizations and the press. 

The Committee’s full Study is more than ten times the length of the Executive 
Summary and includes comprehensive and excruciating detail. The Study 
describes the history of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program from its 
inception to its termination, including a review of each of the 1 19 known 
individuals who were held in CIA custody. 

The full Committee Study also provides substantially more detail than what is 
included in the Executive Summary on the CIA’s justification and defense of its 
interrogation program on the basis that it was necessary and critical to the 
disruption of specific terrorist plots and the capture of specific terrorists. While the 
Executive Summary provides sufficient detail to demonstrate the inaccuracies of 
each of these claims, the information in the full Committee Study is far more 
extensive. 

I chose not to seek declassification of the full Committee Study at this time. I 
believe that the Executive Summary includes enough information to adequately 
describe the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, and the Committee’s 
Findings and Conclusions cover the entirety of the program. Seeking 
declassification of the more than six thousand page report would have significantly 
delayed the release of the Executive Summary. Decisions will be made later on the 
declassification and release of the full 6,700 page Study. 

In 2009, when this effort began, I stated (in a press release co-authored with the 
Vice Chairman of the Committee, Senator Kit Bond) that “the purpose is to review 
the program and to shape detention and interrogation policies in the future.” The 
review is now done. It is my sincere and deep hope that through the release of 
these Findings and Conclusions and Executive Summary that U.S. policy will 
never again allow for secret indefinite detention and the use of coercive 
interrogations. As the Study describes, prior to the attacks of September 2001 , the 
CIA itself determined from its own experience with coercive interrogations, that 
such techniques “do not produce intelligence,” “will probably result in false 
answers,” and had historically proven to be ineffective. Yet these conclusions 
were ignored. We cannot again allow history to be forgotten and grievous past 
mistakes to be repeated. 



Page 3 of 6 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



President Obama signed Executive Order 13491 in January 2009 to prohibit the 
CIA from holding detainees other than on a “short-term, transitory basis” and to 
limit interrogation techniques to those included in the Army Field Manual. 
However, these limitations are not part of U.S. law and could be overturned by a 
future president with the stroke of a pen. They should be enshrined in legislation. 

Even so, existing U.S. law and treaty obligations should have prevented many of 
the abuses and mistakes made during this program. While the Office of Legal 
Counsel found otherwise between 2002 and 2007, it is my personal conclusion 
that, under any common meaning of the term, CIA detainees were tortured. I also 
believe that the conditions of confinement and the use of authorized and 
unauthorized interrogation and conditioning techniques were cruel, inhuman, and 
degrading. I believe the evidence of this is overwhelming and incontrovertible. 

While the Committee did not make specific recommendations, several emerge 
from the Committee’s review. The CIA, in its June 2013 response to the 
Committee’s Study from December 2012, has also already made and begun to 
implement its own recommendations. I intend to work with Senate colleagues to 
produce recommendations and to solicit views from the readers of the Committee 
Study. 

I would also like to take this opportunity to describe the process of this study. 

As noted previously, the Committee approved the Terms of Reference for the 
Study in March 2009 and began requesting information from the CIA and other 
federal departments. The Committee, through its staff, had already reviewed in 
2008 thousands of CIA cables describing the interrogations of the CIA detainees 
Abu Zubaydah and ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, whose interrogations were the 
subject of videotapes that were destroyed by the CIA in 2005. 

The 2008 review was complicated by the existence of a Department of Justice 
investigation, opened by Attorney General Michael Mukasey, into the destruction 
of the videotapes and expanded by Attorney General Holder in August 2009. In 
particular, CIA employees and contractors who would otherwise have been 
interviewed by the Committee staff were under potential legal jeopardy, and 
therefore the CIA would not compel its workforce to appear before the Committee. 
This constraint lasted until the Committee’s research and documentary review 
were completed and the Committee Study had largely been finalized. 



Page 4 of 6 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



Furthermore, given the volume and internal nature of relevant CIA documents, the 
CIA insisted that the Committee enter into an arrangement where our staff would 
reviev^ocuments and conduct research at a CIA-leased facility 
mi rather than at the Committee’s offices on Capitol Hill. 

From early 2009 to late 2012, a small group of Committee staff reviewed the more 
than six million pages of CIA materials, to include operational cables, intelligence 
reports, internal memoranda and emails, briefing materials, interview transcripts, 
contracts, and other records. Draft sections of the Study were prepared and 
distributed to the full Committee membership beginning in October 2011 and this 
process continued through to the Committee’s vote to approve the full Committee 
Study on December 13, 2012. 

The breadth of documentary material on which the Study relied and which the 
Committee Study cites is unprecedented. While the Committee did not interview 
CIA officials in the context of the Committee Study, it had access to and drew 
from the interviews of numerous CIA officials conducted by the CIA’s Inspector 
General and the CIA Oral History program on subjects that lie at the heart of the 
Committee Study, as well as past testimony to the Committee. 

Following the December 2012 vote, the Committee Study was sent to the President 
and appropriate parts of the Executive Branch for comments by February 15, 2013. 
The CIA responded in late June 2013 with extensive comments on the Findings 
and Conclusions, based in part on the responses of CIA officials involved in the 
program. At my direction, the Committee staff met with CIA representatives in 
order to fully understand the CIA’s comments, and then incorporated suggested 
edits or comments as appropriate. 

The Committee Study, including the now-declassified Executive Summary and 
Findings and Conclusions, as updated is now final and represents the official views 
of the Committee. This and future Administrations should use this Study to guide 
future programs, correct past mistakes, increase oversight of CIA representations 
to policymakers, and ensure coercive interrogation practices are not used by our 
government again. 

Finally, I want to recognize the members of the staff who have endured years of 
long hours poring through the difficult details of one of the lowest points in our 
nation’s history. They have produced the most significant and comprehensive 
oversight report in the Committee’s history, and perhaps in that of the U.S. Senate, 
and their contributions should be recognized and praised. 

Page 5 of 6 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



Daniel Jones has managed and led the Committee’s review effort from its 
inception. Dan has devoted more than six years to this effort, has personally 
written thousands of its pages, and has been integrally involved in every Study 
decision. Evan Gottesman, Chad Tanner, and Alissa Starzak have also played 
integral roles in the Committee Study and have spent considerable years 
researching and drafting specific sections of the Committee Study. 

Other Committee staff members have also assisted in the review and provided 
valuable contributions at the direction of our Committee Members. They include, 
among others, Jennifer Barrett, Nick Basciano, Michael Buchwald, Jim Catella, 
Eric Chapman, John Dickas, Lorenzo Goco, Andrew Grotto, Tressa Guenov, Clete 
Johnson, Michael Noblet, Michael Pevzner, Tommy Ross, Caroline Tess, and 
James Wolfe. The Committee’s Staff Director throughout the review, David 
Grannis, has played a central role in assisting me and guiding the Committee 
through this entire process. Without the expertise, patience, and work ethic of our 
able staff, our Members would not have been able to complete this most important 
work. 



Dianne Feinstein 
Chairman 

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 



Page 6 of 6 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Senate Select Committee on 




Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 

Findings and Conclusions 



Approved December 13, 2012 
Updated for Release Aprils, 2014 
Declassification Revisions December 3, 2014 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 1 of 19 
UNCLASSIFIED 




TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 



^ NQFORN 



The Committee makes the following findings and conclusions: 

#1: The CIA’s use of its enhanced interrogation techniques was not an effective means of 
acquiring intelligence or gaining cooperation from detainees. 

The Committee finds, based on a review of CIA interrogation records, that the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques was not an effective means of obtaining accurate information 
or gaining detainee cooperation. 

For example, according to CIA records, seven of the 39 CIA detainees known to have been 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques produced no intelligence while in CIA 
custody. 1 CIA detainees who were subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
were usually subjected to the techniques immediately after being rendered to CIA custody. 

Other detainees provided significant accurate intelligence prior to, or without having been 
subjected to these techniques. 

While being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and afterwards, multiple 
CIA detainees fabricated information, resulting in faulty intelligence. Detainees provided 
fabricated information on critical intelligence issues, including the terrorist threats which the 
CIA identified as its highest priorities. 

At numerous times throughout the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, CIA personnel 
assessed that the most effective method for acquiring intelligence from detainees, including from 
detainees the CIA considered to be the most “high-value,” was to confront the detainees with 
information already acquired by the Intelligence Community. CIA officers regularly called into 
question whether the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were effective, assessing that the 
use of the techniques failed to elicit detainee cooperation or produce accurate intelligence. 



#2: The CIA’s justification for the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques rested on 
inaccurate claims of their effectiveness. 

The CIA represented to the White House, the National Security Council, the Department of 
Justice, the CIA Office of Inspector General, the Congress, and the public that the best measure 
of effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was examples of specific 
terrorist plots “thwarted” and specific terrorists captured as a result of the use of the techniques. 
The CIA used these examples to claim that its enhanced interrogation techniques were not only 
effective, but also necessary to acquire “otherwise unavailable” actionable intelligence that 
“saved lives.” 

The Committee reviewed 20 of the most frequent and prominent examples of purported 
counterterrorism successes that the CIA has attributed to the use of its enhanced interrogation 
techniques, and found them to be wrong in fundamental respects. In some cases, there was no 
relationship between the cited counterterrorism success and any information provided by 
detainees during or after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. In the 



TOP SECRET/y 



Page 2 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



VNOFORN 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T// 



//NQF O RN 



remaining cases, the CIA inaccurately claimed that specific, otherwise unavailable information 
was acquired from a CIA detainee “as a result” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
when in fact the information was either: (1) corroborative of information already available to the 
CIA or other elements of the U.S. Intelligence Community from sources other than the CIA 
detainee, and was therefore not “otherwise unavailable”; or (2) acquired from the CIA detainee 
prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The examples provided by the 
CIA included numerous factual inaccuracies. 

In providing the “effectiveness” examples to policymakers, the Department of Justice, and 
others, the CIA consistently omitted the significant amount of relevant intelligence obtained 
from sources other than CIA detainees who had been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques — leaving the false impression the CIA was acquiring unique 
information from the use of the techniques. 

Some of the plots that the CIA claimed to have “disrupted” as a result of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques were assessed by intelligence and law enforcement officials as being 
infeasible or ideas that were never operationalized. 



#3: The interrogations of CIA detainees were brutal and far worse than the CIA 
represented to policymakers and others. 

Beginning with the CIA’s first detainee, Abu Zubaydah, and continuing with numerous others, 
the CIA applied its enhanced interrogation techniques with significant repetition for days or 
weeks at a time. Interrogation techniques such as slaps and “wallings” (slamming detainees 
against a wall) were used in combination, frequently concurrent with sleep deprivation and 
nudity. Records do not support CIA representations that the CIA initially used an “an open, non- 
threatening approach,” 2 or that interrogations began with the “least coercive technique possible” 3 
and escalated to more coercive techniques only as necessary. 

The waterboarding technique was physically harmful, inducing convulsions and vomiting. Abu 
Zubaydah, for example, became “completely unresponsive, with bubbles rising through his open, 
full mouth.” 4 Internal CIA records describe the waterboarding of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad as 
evolving into a “series of near drownings.” 5 

Sleep deprivation involved keeping detainees awake for up to 180 hours, usually standing or in 
stress positions, at times with their hands shackled above their heads. At least five detainees 
experienced disturbing hallucinations during prolonged sleep deprivation and, in at least two of 
those cases, the CIA nonetheless continued the sleep deprivation. 

Contrary to CIA representations to the Department of Justice, the CIA instructed personnel that 
the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah would take “precedence” over his medical care, 6 resulting in 
the deterioration of a bullet wound Abu Zubaydah incurred during his capture. In at least two 
other cases, the CIA used its enhanced interrogation techniques despite warnings from CIA 
medical personnel that the techniques could exacerbate physical injuries. CIA medical personnel 



TOP SECRET/; 



Page 3 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



VNOFOR N 





T - QP SE C RET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 



7NQFQRN 



treated at least one detainee for swelling in order to allow the continued use of standing sleep 
deprivation. 

At least five CIA detainees were subjected to “rectal rehydration” or rectal feeding without 
documented medical necessity. The CIA placed detainees in ice water “baths.” The CIA led 
several detainees to believe they would never be allowed to leave CIA custody alive, suggesting 
to one detainee that he would only leave in a coffin-shaped box. 7 One interrogator told another 
detainee that he would never go to court, because “we can never let the world know what I have 
done to you.” 8 CIA officers also threatened at least three detainees with harm to their families — 
to include threats to harm the children of a detainee, threats to sexually abuse the mother of a 
detainee, and a threat to “cut [a detainee’s] mother’s throat.” 9 



#4: The conditions of confinement for CIA detainees were harsher than the CIA had 
represented to policymakers and others. 

Conditions at CIA detention sites were poor, and were especially bleak early in the program. 
CIA detainees at the COBALT detention facility were kept in complete darkness and constantly 
shackled in isolated cells with loud noise or music and only a bucket to use for human waste. 10 
Lack of heat at the facility likely contributed to the death of a detainee. The chief of 
interrogations described COBALT as a “dungeon.” 11 Another senior CIA officer stated that 
COBALT was itself an enhanced interrogation technique. 12 

At times, the detainees at COBALT were walked around naked or were shackled with their 
hands above their heads for extended periods of time. Other times, the detainees at COBALT 
were subjected to what was described as a “rough takedown,” in which approximately five CIA 
officers would scream at a detainee, drag him outside of his cell, cut his clothes off, and secure 
him with Mylar tape. The detainee would then be hooded and dragged up and down a long 
corridor while being slapped and punched. 

Even after the conditions of confinement improved with the construction of new detention 
facilities, detainees were held in total isolation except when being interrogated or debriefed by 
CIA personnel. 

Throughout the program, multiple CIA detainees who were subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques and extended isolation exhibited psychological and behavioral issues, 
including hallucinations, paranoia, insomnia, and attempts at self-harm and self-mutilation. 
Multiple psychologists identified the lack of human contact experienced by detainees as a cause 
of psychiatric problems. 



#5: The CIA repeatedly provided inaccurate information to the Department of Justice, 
impeding a proper legal analysis of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 

From 2002 to 2007, the Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) within the Department of Justice relied 
on CIA representations regarding: (1) the conditions of confinement for detainees, (2) the 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 4 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



f/NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



application of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, (3) the physical effects of the 
techniques on detainees, and (4) the effectiveness of the techniques. Those representations were 
inaccurate in material respects. 

The Department of Justice did not conduct independent analysis or verification of the 
information it received from the CIA. The department warned, however, that if the facts 
provided by the CIA were to change, its legal conclusions might not apply. When the CIA 
determined that information it had provided to the Department of Justice was incorrect, the CIA 
rarely informed the department. 

Prior to the initiation of the CIA’ s Detention and Interrogation Program and throughout the life 
of the program, the legal justifications for the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques relied on 
the CIA’s claim that the techniques were necessary to save lives. In late 2001 and early 2002, 
senior attorneys at the CIA Office of General Counsel first examined the legal implications of 
using coercive interrogation techniques. CIA attorneys stated that “a novel application of the 
necessity defense” could be used “to avoid prosecution of U.S. officials who tortured to obtain 
information that saved many lives.” 13 

Having reviewed information provided by the CIA, the OLC included the “necessity defense” in 
its August 1, 2002, memorandum to the White House counsel on Standards of Conduct for 
Interrogation. The OLC determined that “under the current circumstances, necessity or self- 
defense may justify interrogation methods that might violate” the criminal prohibition against 
torture. 

On the same day, a second OLC opinion approved, for the first time, the use of 10 specific 
coercive interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah — subsequently referred to as the CIA’s 
“enhanced interrogation techniques.” The OLC relied on inaccurate CIA representations about 
Abu Zubaydah’ s status in al-Qa’ida and the interrogation team’s “certain[tyj” that Abu 
Zubaydah was withholding information about planned terrorist attacks. The CIA’s 
representations to the OLC about the techniques were also inconsistent with how the techniques 
would later be applied. 

In March 2005, the CIA submitted to the Department of Justice various examples of the 
“effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques that were inaccurate. OLC 
memoranda signed on May 30, 2005, and July 20, 2007, relied on these representations, 
determining that the techniques were legal in part because they produced “specific, actionable 
intelligence” and “substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence” that saved lives. 14 



#6: The CIA has actively avoided or impeded congressional oversight of the program. 

The CIA did not brief the leadership of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques until September 2002, after the techniques had been 
approved and used. The CIA did not respond to Chairman Bob Graham’s requests for additional 
information in 2002, noting in its own internal communications that he would be leaving the 
Committee in January 2003. The CIA subsequently resisted efforts by Vice Chairman John D. 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 5 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



VNOFORN 





TOP SECRET/y 



UNCLASSIFIED 



//NOFORN 



Rockefeller IV, to investigate the program, including by refusing in 2006 to provide requested 
documents to the full Committee. 

The CIA restricted access to information about the program from members of the Committee 
beyond the chairman and vice chairman until September 6, 2006, the day the president publicly 
acknowledged the program, by which time 1 17 of the 1 19 known detainees had already entered 
CIA custody. Until then, the CIA had declined to answer questions from other Committee 
members that related to CIA interrogation activities. 15 

Prior to September 6, 2006, the CIA provided inaccurate information to the leadership of the 
Committee. Briefings to the full Committee beginning on September 6, 2006, also contained 
numerous inaccuracies, including inaccurate descriptions of how interrogation techniques were 
applied and what information was obtained from CIA detainees. The CIA misrepresented the 
views of members of Congress on a number of occasions. After multiple senators had been 
critical of the program and written letters expressing concerns to CIA Director Michael Hayden, 
Director Hayden nonetheless told a meeting of foreign ambassadors to the United States that 
every Committee member was “fully briefed,” and that “[t]his is not CIA’s program. This is not 
the President’s program. This is America’s program.” 16 The CIA also provided inaccurate 
information describing the views of U.S. senators about the program to the Department of 
Justice. 

A year after being briefed on the program, the House and Senate Conference Committee 
considering the Fiscal Year 2008 Intelligence Authorization bill voted to limit the CIA to using 
only interrogation techniques authorized by the Army Field Manual. That legislation was 
approved by the Senate and the House of Representatives in February 2008, and was vetoed by 
President Bush on March 8, 2008. 



#7: The CIA impeded effective White House oversight and decision-making. 

The CIA provided extensive amounts of inaccurate and incomplete information related to the 
operation and effectiveness of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program to the White 
House, the National Security Council principals, and their staffs. This prevented an accurate and 
complete understanding of the program by Executive Branch officials, thereby impeding 
oversight and decision-making. 

According to CIA records, no CIA officer, up to and including CIA Directors George Tenet and 
Porter Goss, briefed the president on the specific CIA enhanced interrogation techniques before 
April 2006. By that time, 38 of the 39 detainees identified as having been subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques had already been subjected to the techniques. 17 The CIA did 
not inform the president or vice president of the location of CIA detention facilities other than 
Country |. 18 

At the direction of the White House, the secretaries of state and defense - both principals on the 
National Security Council - were not briefed on program specifics until September 2003. An 
internal CIA email from July 2003 noted that “... the WH [White House] is extremely concerned 



TOP SECRET/y 



Page 6 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



^ NOFORN 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQFQRN 



[Secretary] Powell would blow his stack if he were to be briefed on what’s been going on.” 19 
Deputy Secretary of State Armitage complained that he and Secretary Powell were “cut out” of 
the National Security Council coordination process. 20 

The CIA repeatedly provided incomplete and inaccurate information to White House personnel 
regarding the operation and effectiveness of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 
This includes the provision of inaccurate statements similar to those provided to other elements 
of the U.S. Government and later to the public, as well as instances in which specific questions 
from White House officials were not answered truthfully or fully. In briefings for the National 
Security Council principals and White House officials, the CIA advocated for the continued use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, warning that “[t]ermination of this program will 
result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” 21 



#8: The CIA’s operation and management of the program complicated, and in some cases 
impeded, the national security missions of other Executive Branch agencies. 

The CIA, in the conduct of its Detention and Interrogation Program, complicated, and in some 
cases impeded, the national security missions of other Executive Branch agencies, including the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the State Department, and the Office of the Director of 
National Intelligence (ODNI). The CIA withheld or restricted information relevant to these 
agencies’ missions and responsibilities, denied access to detainees, and provided inaccurate 
information on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program to these agencies. 

The use of coercive interrogation techniques and covert detention facilities that did not meet 
traditional U.S. standards resulted in the FBI and the Department of Defense limiting their 
involvement in CIA interrogation and detention activities. This reduced the ability of the U.S. 
Government to deploy available resources and expert personnel to interrogate detainees and 
operate detention facilities. The CIA denied specific requests from FBI Director Robert Mueller 
III for FBI access to CIA detainees that the FBI believed was necessary to understand CIA 
detainee reporting on threats to the U.S. Homeland. Information obtained from CIA detainees 
was restricted within the Intelligence Community, leading to concerns among senior CIA 
officers that limitations on sharing information undermined government-wide counterterrorism 
analysis. 

The CIA blocked State Department leadership from access to information crucial to foreign 
policy decision-making and diplomatic activities. The CIA did not inform two secretaries of 
state of locations of CIA detention facilities, despite the significant foreign policy implications 
related to the hosting of clandestine CIA detention sites and the fact that the political leaders of 
host countries were generally informed of their existence. Moreover, CIA officers told U.S. 
ambassadors not to discuss the CIA program with State Department officials, preventing the 
ambassadors from seeking guidance on the policy implications of establishing CIA detention 
facilities in the countries in which they served. 

In two countries, U.S. ambassadors were informed of plans to establish a CIA detention site in 
the countries where they were serving after the CIA had already entered into agreements with the 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 7 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



^ NOF O R N 




TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 






flNOFORN 



countries to host the detention sites. In two other countries where negotiations on hosting new 
CIA detention facilities were taking place, 22 the CIA told local government officials not to 
inform the U.S. ambassadors 23 

The ODNI was provided with inaccurate and incomplete information about the program, 
preventing the director of national intelligence from effectively carrying out the director’s 
statutory responsibility to serve as the principal advisor to the president on intelligence matters. 
The inaccurate information provided to the ODNI by the CIA resulted in the ODNI releasing 
inaccurate information to the public in September 2006. 



#9: The CIA impeded oversight by the CIA’s Office of Inspector General. 

The CIA avoided, resisted, and otherwise impeded oversight of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program by the CIA’s Office of Inspector General (OIG). The CIA did not brief 
the OIG on the program until after the death of a detainee, by which time the CIA had held at 
least 22 detainees at two different CIA detention sites. Once notified, the OIG reviewed the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program and issued several reports, including an important 
May 2004 “Special Review” of the program that identified significant concerns and deficiencies. 

During the OIG reviews, CIA personnel provided OIG with inaccurate information on the 
operation and management of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, as well as on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The inaccurate information was 
included in the final May 2004 Special Review, which was later declassified and released 
publicly, and remains uncorrected. 

In 2005, CIA Director Goss requested in writing that the inspector general not initiate further 
reviews of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program until reviews already underway were 
completed. In 2007, Director Hayden ordered an unprecedented review of the OIG itself in 
response to the OIG’s inquiries into the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 



#10: The CIA coordinated the release of classified information to the media, including 
inaccurate information concerning the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 

The CIA’s Office of Public Affairs and senior CIA officials coordinated to share classified 
information on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program to select members of the media to 
counter public criticism, shape public opinion, and avoid potential congressional action to restrict 
the CIA’s detention and interrogation authorities and budget. These disclosures occurred when 
the program was a classified covert action program, and before the CIA had briefed the full 
Committee membership on the program. 

The deputy director of the CIA’s Counterterrorism Center wrote to a colleague in 2005, shortly 
before being interviewed by a media outlet, that “we either get out and sell, or we get hammered, 
which has implications beyond the media. [C]ongress reads it, cuts our authorities, messes up 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 8 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



7NOFORN 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



our budget. . . we either put out our story or we get eaten. [T]here is no middle ground.” 24 The 
same CIA officer explained to a colleague that “when the [Washington Post]/[New York T]imes 
quotes ‘senior intelligence official,’ it’s us... authorized and directed by opa [CIA’s Office of 
Public Affairs].” 25 

Much of the information the CIA provided to the media on the operation of the CIA’s Detention 
and Interrogation Program and the effectiveness of its enhanced interrogation techniques was 
inaccurate and was similar to the inaccurate information provided by the CIA to the Congress, 
the Department of Justice, and the White House. 



#11: The CIA was unprepared as it began operating its Detention and Interrogation 
Program more than six months after being granted detention authorities. 

On September 17, 2001, the President signed a covert action Memorandum of Notification 
(MON) granting the CIA unprecedented counterterrorism authorities, including the authority to 
covertly capture and detain individuals “posing a continuing, serious threat of violence or death 
to U.S. persons and interests or planning terrorist activities.” The MON made no reference to 
interrogations or coercive interrogation techniques. 

The CIA was not prepared to take custody of its first detainee. In the fall of 2001, the CIA 
explored the possibility of establishing clandestine detention facilities in several countries. The 
CIA’s review identified risks associated with clandestine detention that led it to conclude that 
U.S. military bases were the best option for the CIA to detain individuals under the MON 
authorities. In late March 2002, the imminent capture of Abu Zubaydah prompted the CIA to 
again consider various detention options. In part to avoid declaring Abu Zubaydah to the 
International Committee of the Red Cross, which would be required if he were detained at a U.S. 
military base, the CIA decided to seek authorization to clandestinely detain Abu Zubaydah at a 
facility in Country | — a country that had not previously been considered as a potential host for a 
CIA detention site. A senior CIA officer indicated that the CIA “will have to acknowledge 
certain gaps in our planning/preparations,” 26 but stated that this plan would be presented to the 
president. At a Presidential Daily Briefing session that day, the president approved CIA’s 
proposal to detain Abu Zubaydah in Country |. 

The CIA lacked a plan for the eventual disposition of its detainees. After taking custody of Abu 
Zubaydah, CIA officers concluded that he “should remain incommunicado for the remainder of 
his life,” which “may preclude [Abu Zubaydah] from being turned over to another country.” 27 

The CIA did not review its past experience with coercive interrogations, or its previous statement 
to Congress that “inhumane physical or psychological techniques are counterproductive because 
they do not produce intelligence and will probably result in false answers.” 28 The CIA also did 
not contact other elements of the U.S. Government with interrogation expertise. 

In July 2002, on the basis of consultations with contract psychologists, and with very limited 
internal deliberation, the CIA requested approval from the Department of Justice to use a set of 
coercive interrogation techniques. The techniques were adapted from the training of U.S. 



TOP SEC - RET// 



Page 9 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



7NOF O RN 



TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 



i 



flNOFORN 



military personnel at the U.S. Air Force Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) 
school, which was designed to prepare U.S. military personnel for the conditions and treatment 
to which they might be subjected if taken prisoner by countries that do not adhere to the Geneva 
Conventions. 

As it began detention and interrogation operations, the CIA deployed personnel who lacked 
relevant training and experience. The CIA began interrogation training more than seven months 
after taking custody of Abu Zubaydah, and more than three months after the CIA began using its 
“enhanced interrogation techniques.” CIA Director George Tenet issued formal guidelines for 
interrogations and conditions of confinement at detention sites in January 2003, by which time 
40 of the 119 known detainees had been detained by the CIA. 



#12: The CIA’s management and operation of its Detention and Interrogation Program 
was deeply flawed throughout the program’s duration, particularly so in 2002 and early 
2003. 

The CIA’s COBALT detention facility in Country | began operations in September 2002 and 
ultimately housed more than half of the 1 19 CIA detainees identified in this Study. The CIA 
kept few formal records of the detainees in its custody at COBALT. Untrained CIA officers at 
the facility conducted frequent, unauthorized, and unsupervised interrogations of detainees using 
harsh physical interrogation techniques that were not — and never became — part of the CIA’s 
formal “enhanced” interrogation program. The CIAplaced a junior officer with no relevant 
experience in charge of COBALT. On November 2002, a detainee who had been held 
partially nude and chained to a concrete floor died from suspected hypothermia at the facility. 

At the time, no single unit at CIA Headquarters had clear responsibility for CIA detention and 
interrogation operations. In interviews conducted in 2003 with the Office of Inspector General, 
CIA’s leadership and senior attorneys acknowledged that they had little or no awareness of 
operations at COBALT, and some believed that enhanced interrogation techniques were not used 
there. 

Although CIA Director Tenet in January 2003 issued guidance for detention and interrogation 
activities, serious management problems persisted. For example, in December 2003, CIA 
personnel reported that they had made the “unsettling discovery” that the CIA had been “holding 
a number of detainees about whom” the CIA knew “very little” at multiple detention sites in 
Country |. 29 

Divergent lines of authority for interrogation activities persisted through at least 2003. Tensions 
among interrogators extended to complaints about the safety and effectiveness of each other’s 
interrogation practices. 

The CIA placed individuals with no applicable experience or training in senior detention and 
interrogation roles, and provided inadequate linguistic and analytical support to conduct effective 
questioning of CIA detainees, resulting in diminished intelligence. The lack of CIA personnel 
available to question detainees, which the CIA inspector general referred to as “an ongoing 
problem,” 30 persisted throughout the program. 



i 



// NOFORN 



T OP SECRET // 



Page 10 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



VNOFORN 



TOP SECRET# 



In 2005, the chief of the CIA’s BLACK detention site, where many of the detainees the CIA 
assessed as “high-value” were held, complained that CIA Headquarters “managers seem to be 
selecting either problem, underperforming officers, new, totally inexperienced officers or 
whomever seems to be willing and able to deploy at any given time,” resulting in “the production 
of mediocre or, I dare say, useless intelligence....” 31 

Numerous CIA officers had serious documented personal and professional problems — including 
histories of violence and records of abusive treatment of others — that should have called into 
question their suitability to participate in the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, their 
employment with the CIA, and their continued access to classified information. In nearly all 
cases, these problems were known to the CIA prior to the assignment of these officers to 
detention and interrogation positions. 



#13: Two contract psychologists devised the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and 
played a central role in the operation, assessments, and management of the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. By 2005, the CIA had overwhelmingly outsourced 
operations related to the program. 

The CIA contracted with two psychologists to develop, operate, and assess its interrogation 
operations. The psychologists’ prior experience was at the U.S. Air Force Survival, Evasion, 
Resistance and Escape (SERE) school. Neither psychologist had any experience as an 
interrogator, nor did either have specialized knowledge of al-Qa’ida, a background in 
counterterrorism, or any relevant cultural or linguistic expertise. 

On the CIA’s behalf, the contract psychologists developed theories of interrogation based on 
“learned helplessness,” 32 and developed the list of enhanced interrogation techniques that was 
approved for use against Abu Zubaydah and subsequent CIA detainees. The psychologists 
personally conducted interrogations of some of the CIA’s most significant detainees using these 
techniques. They also evaluated whether detainees’ psychological state allowed for the 
continued use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including some detainees whom 
they were themselves interrogating or had interrogated. The psychologists carried out inherently 
governmental functions, such as acting as liaison between the CIA and foreign intelligence 
services, assessing the effectiveness of the interrogation program, and participating in the 
interrogation of detainees in held in foreign government custody. 

In 2005, the psychologists formed a company specifically for the purpose of conducting their 
work with the CIA. Shortly thereafter, the CIA outsourced virtually all aspects of the program. 

In 2006, the value of the CIA’s base contract with the company formed by the psychologists with 
all options exercised was in excess of $180 million; the contractors received $81 million prior to 
the contract’s termination in 2009. In 2007, the CIA provided a multi-year indemnification 
agreement to protect the company and its employees from legal liability arising out of the 
program. The CIA has since paid out more than $1 million pursuant to the agreement. 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 11 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



VNOF Q R N 



TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 






//NOFOR N 



In 2008, the CIA’s Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Group, the lead unit for detention and 
interrogation operations at the CIA, had a total of positions, which were filled with | CIA 
staff officers and contractors, meaning that contractors made up 85% of the workforce for 
detention and interrogation operations. 



#14: CIA detainees were subjected to coercive interrogation techniques that had not been 
approved by the Department of Justice or had not been authorized by CIA Headquarters. 

Prior to mid- 2004, the CIA routinely subjected detainees to nudity and dietary manipulation. 

The CIA also used abdominal slaps and cold water dousing on several detainees during that 
period. None of these techniques had been approved by the Department of Justice. 

At least 17 detainees were subjected to CIA enhanced interrogation techniques without 
authorization from CIA Headquarters. Additionally, multiple detainees were subjected to 
techniques that were applied in ways that diverged from the specific authorization, or were 
subjected to enhanced interrogation techniques by interrogators who had not been authorized to 
use them. Although these incidents were recorded in CIA cables and, in at least some cases were 
identified at the time by supervisors at CIA Headquarters as being inappropriate, corrective 
action was rarely taken against the interrogators involved. 



#15: The CIA did not conduct a comprehensive or accurate accounting of the number of 
individuals it detained, and held individuals who did not meet the legal standard for 
detention. The CIA’s claims about the number of detainees held and subjected to its 
enhanced interrogation techniques were inaccurate. 

The CIA never conducted a comprehensive audit or developed a complete and accurate list of the 
individuals it had detained or subjected to its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA statements 
to the Committee and later to the public that the CIA detained fewer than 100 individuals, and 
that less than a third of those 100 detainees were subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, were inaccurate. The Committee’s review of CIA records determined that the CIA 
detained at least 119 individuals, of whom at least 39 were subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 

Of the 119 known detainees, at least 26 were wrongfully held and did not meet the detention 
standard in the September 2001 Memorandum of Notification (MON). These included an 
“intellectually challenged” man whose CIA detention was used solely as leverage to get a family 
member to provide information, two individuals who were intelligence sources for foreign 
liaison services and were former CIA sources, and two individuals whom the CIA assessed to be 
connected to al-Qa’ida based solely on information fabricated by a CIA detainee subjected to the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Detainees often remained in custody for months after 
the CIA determined that they did not meet the MON standard. CIA records provide insufficient 
information to justify the detention of many other detainees. 



TO PSECRET/y 



Page 12 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



7N OFORN 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET# 



//NOF O RN 



CIA Headquarters instructed that at least four CIA detainees be placed in host country detention 
facilities because the individuals did not meet the MON standard for CIA detention. The host 
country had no independent reason to hold the detainees. 

A full accounting of CIA detentions and interrogations may be impossible, as records in some 
cases are non-existent, and, in many other cases, are sparse and insufficient. There were almost 
no detailed records of the detentions and interrogations at the CIA’s COBALT detention facility 
in 2002, and almost no such records for the CIA’s GRAY detention site, also in Country |. At 
CIA detention facilities outside of Country |, the CIA kept increasingly less-detailed records of 
its interrogation activities over the course of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 



#16: The CIA failed to adequately evaluate the effectiveness of its enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 

The CIA never conducted a credible, comprehensive analysis of the effectiveness of its enhanced 
interrogation techniques, despite a recommendation by the CIA inspector general and similar 
requests by the national security advisor and the leadership of the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence. 

Internal assessments of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program were conducted by CIA 
personnel who participated in the development and management of the program, as well as by 
CIA contractors who had a financial interest in its continuation and expansion. An “informal 
operational assessment” of the program, led by two senior CIA officers who were not part of the 
CIA’s Counterterrorism Center, determined that it would not be possible to assess the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques without violating “Federal Policy 
for the Protection of Human Subjects” regarding human experimentation. The CIA officers, 
whose review relied on briefings with CIA officers and contractors running the program, 
concluded only that the “CIA Detainee Program” was a “success” without addressing the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 33 

In 2005, in response to the recommendation by the inspector general for a review of the 
effectiveness of each of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the CIA asked two 
individuals not employed by the CIA to conduct a broader review of “the entirety of’ the 
“rendition, detention and interrogation program.” 34 According to one individual, the review was 
“heavily reliant on the willingness of [CIA Counterterrorism Center] staff to provide us with the 
factual material that forms the basis of our conclusions.” That individual acknowledged lacking 
the requisite expertise to review the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, and concluded only that “the program,” meaning all CIA detainee reporting 
regardless of whether it was connected to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, was a “great success.” 35 The second reviewer concluded that “there is no objective 
way to answer the question of efficacy” of the techniques. 36 

There are no CIA records to indicate that any of the reviews independently validated the 
“effectiveness” claims presented by the CIA, to include basic confirmation that the intelligence 
cited by the CIA was acquired from CIA detainees during or after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 



T OP SECRET /i 



Page 13 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



'/NOFOR N 





TOP SECRET/y 



UNCLASSIFIED 



/ 



fl NOFORN 



interrogation techniques. Nor did the reviews seek to confirm whether the intelligence cited by 
the CIA as being obtained “as a result” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was 
unique and “otherwise unavailable,” as claimed by the CIA, and not previously obtained from 
other sources. 



#17: The CIA rarely reprimanded or held personnel accountable for serious and 
significant violations, inappropriate activities, and systemic and individual management 
failures. 

CIA officers and CIA contractors who were found to have violated CIA policies or performed 
poorly were rarely held accountable or removed from positions of responsibility. 

Significant events, to include the death and injury of CIA detainees, the detention of individuals 
who did not meet the legal standard to be held, the use of unauthorized interrogation techniques 
against CIA detainees, and the provision of inaccurate information on the CIA program did not 
result in appropriate, effective, or in many cases, any corrective actions. CIA managers who 
were aware of failings and shortcomings in the program but did not intervene, or who failed to 
provide proper leadership and management, were also not held to account. 

On two occasions in which the CIA inspector general identified wrongdoing, accountability 
recommendations were overruled by senior CIA leadership. In one instance, involving the death 
of a CIA detainee at COBALT, CIA Headquarters decided not to take disciplinary action against 
an officer involved because, at the time, CIA Headquarters had been “motivated to extract any 
and all operational information” from the detainee. 37 In another instance related to a wrongful 
detention, no action was taken against a CIA officer because, “[t]he Director strongly believes 
that mistakes should be expected in a business filled with uncertainty,” and “the Director 
believes the scale tips decisively in favor of accepting mistakes that over connect the dots against 
those that under connect them.” 38 In neither case was administrative action taken against CIA 
management personnel. 



#18: The CIA marginalized and ignored numerous internal critiques, criticisms, and 
objections concerning the operation and management of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. 

Critiques, criticisms, and objections were expressed by numerous CIA officers, including senior 
personnel overseeing and managing the program, as well as analysts, interrogators, and medical 
officers involved in or supporting CIA detention and interrogation operations. 

Examples of these concerns include CIA officers questioning the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, interrogators disagreeing with the use of such techniques 
against detainees whom they determined were not withholding information, psychologists 
recommending less isolated conditions, and Office of Medical Services personnel questioning 
both the effectiveness and safety of the techniques. These concerns were regularly overridden by 
CIA management, and the CIA made few corrective changes to its policies governing the 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 14 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



7 NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 



VNOFORN 



T - OF SECRET E 



/ 



program. At times, CIA officers were instructed by supervisors not to put their concerns or 
observations in written communications. 

In several instances, CIA officers identified inaccuracies in CIA representations about the 
program and its effectiveness to the Office of Inspector General, the White House, the 
Department of Justice, the Congress, and the American public. The CIA nonetheless failed to 
take action to correct these representations, and allowed inaccurate information to remain as the 
CIA’s official position. 

The CIA was also resistant to, and highly critical of more formal critiques. The deputy director 
for operations stated that the CIA inspector general’s draft Special Review should have come to 
the “conclusion that our efforts have thwarted attacks and saved lives,’’ 39 while the CIA general 
counsel accused the inspector general of presenting “an imbalanced and inaccurate picture” of 
the program. 40 A February 2007 report from the International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC), which the CIA acting general counsel initially stated “actually does not sound that far 
removed from the reality,” 41 was also criticized. CIA officers prepared documents indicating 
that “critical portions of the Report are patently false or misleading, especially certain key factual 
claims. . ..” 42 CIA Director Hayden testified to the Committee that “numerous false allegations of 
physical and threatened abuse and faulty legal assumptions and analysis in the [ICRC] report 
undermine its overall credibility.” 43 



#19: The CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program was inherently unsustainable and 
had effectively ended by 2006 due to unauthorized press disclosures, reduced cooperation 
from other nations, and legal and oversight concerns. 

The CIA required secrecy and cooperation from other nations in order to operate clandestine 
detention facilities, and both had eroded significantly before President Bush publicly disclosed 
the program on September 6, 2006. From the beginning of the program, the CIA faced 
significant challenges in finding nations willing to host CIA clandestine detention sites. These 
challenges became increasingly difficult over time. With the exception of Country the CIA 
was forced to relocate detainees out of every country in which it established a detention facility 
because of pressure from the host government or public revelations about the program. 
Beginning in early 2005, the CIA sought unsuccessfully to convince the U.S. Department of 
Defense to allow the transfer of numerous CIA detainees to U.S. military custody. By 2006, the 
CIA admitted in its own talking points for CIA Director Porter Goss that, absent an 
Administration decision on an “endgame” for detainees, the CIA was “stymied” and “the 
program could collapse of its own weight.” 44 

Lack of access to adequate medical care for detainees in countries hosting the CIA’s detention 
facilities caused recurring problems. The refusal of one host country to admit a severely ill 
detainee into a local hospital due to security concerns contributed to the closing of the CIA’s 
detention facility in that country. The U.S. Department of Defense also declined to provide 
medical care to detainees upon CIA request. 



TOP SECRET// 



Page 15 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



7NOF O R N 




TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 



/ 



//NOFORN 



In mid-2003, a statement by the president for the United Nations International Day in Support of 
Victims of Torture and a public statement by the White House that prisoners in U.S. custody are 
treated “humanely” caused the CIA to question whether there was continued policy support for 
the program and seek reauthorization from the White House. In mid-2004, the CIA temporarily 
suspended the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques after the CIA inspector general 
recommended that the CIA seek an updated legal opinion from the Office of Legal Counsel. In 
early 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court decision to grant certiorari in the case of Rasul v. Bush 
prompted the CIA to move detainees out of a CIA detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. 
In late 2005 and in 2006, the Detainee Treatment Act and then the U.S. Supreme Court decision 
in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld caused the CIA to again temporarily suspend the use of its enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 

By 2006, press disclosures, the unwillingness of other countries to host existing or new detention 
sites, and legal and oversight concerns had largely ended the CIA’s ability to operate clandestine 
detention facilities. 

After detaining at least 113 individuals through 2004, the CIA brought only six additional 
detainees into its custody: four in 2005, one in 2006, and one in 2007. By March 2006, the 
program was operating in only one country. The CIA last used its enhanced interrogation 
techniques on November 8, 2007. The CIA did not hold any detainees after April 2008. 



#20: The CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program damaged the United States’ 
standing in the world, and resulted in other significant monetary and non-monetary costs. 

The CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program created tensions with U.S. partners and allies, 
leading to formal demarches to the United States, and damaging and complicating bilateral 
intelligence relationships. 

In one example, in June 2004, the secretary of state ordered the U.S. ambassador in Country | to 
deliver a demarche to CountryB/hnessence demanding [Country | Government] provide full 
access to all [Country | detainees” to the International Committee of the Red 

Cross. At the time, however, the detainees Country | was holding included detainees being held 
in secret at the CIA’s behest. 45 

More broadly, the program caused immeasurable damage to the United States’ public standing, 
as well as to the United States’ longstanding global leadership on human rights in general and the 
prevention of torture in particular. 

CIA records indicate that the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program cost well over $300 
million in non-personnel costs. This included funding for the CIA to construct and maintain 
detention facilities, including two facilities costing nearly $H million that were never used, in 
part due to host country political concerns. 

To encourage governments to clandestinely host CIA detention sites, or to increase support for 
existing sites, the CIA provided millions of dollars in cash payments to foreign government 



TOP SECRET/; 



Page 16 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



^ NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET# 



mm & m 



officials. CIA Headq uarters encouraged CIA Stati on s to co nstruct “wish lists” of proposed 
financial assistance to '[entities of foreign governments], and to 
‘‘think big” in terms of that assistance. 46 



TQP - SEGRE TO 



Page 17 of 19 
UNCLASSIFIED 




TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 



7NOFORN 



1 As measured by the number of disseminated intelligence reports. Therefore, zero intelligence reports were 
disseminated based on information provided by seven of the 39 detainees known to have been subjected to the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

2 May 30, 2005, Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, 
from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 
Justice, re: Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain 
Techniques that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

3 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, September 6, 2006. 

4 This episode was not described in CIA cables, but was described in internal emails sent by personnel in the CIA 

Office of Medical Services and the CIA Office of General Counsel. A review of the videotapes of the interrogations 
of Abu Zubaydah by the CIA Office of Inspector General (OIG) did not note the incident. A review of the catalog 
of videotapes, however, found that recordings of a 21 -hour period, which included two waterboarding sessions, were 
missing. 

from to cc: mi^; re More. 

Throughoutthe Committee Study, last names in all capitalized letters are pseudonyms. 

6 ALEC (182321Z JUL 02) 

7 At the time, confining a detainee in a box with the dimensions of a coffin was an approved CIA enhanced 
interrogation technique. 

8 [REDACTEDH32^G6n50Z SEP 03), referring to Hambali. 

9 Interview of by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, June 17, 

2003 

10 In one case, interrogators informed a detainee that he could earn a bucket if he cooperated. 

11 Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, April 7, 

2003, p. 12. 

12 Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, May 8, 

2003, p. 9. 

13 November 26, 2001, Draft of Legal Appendix, Paragraph 5, “Hostile Interrogations: Legal Considerations for CIA 
Officers,” at 1. 

14 May 30, 2005, Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, 
from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 
Justice, re: Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain 
Techniques that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. July 20, 2007, Memorandum 
for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal 
Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, re: Application of War Crimes 
Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May 
be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

15 The CIA’s June 27, 2013, Response to the Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 
states that these limitations were dictated by the White House. The CIA’s June 2013 Response then acknowledges 
that the CIA w as “comf ortable” with this decision. 

16 DIRECTOR (152227Z MAR 07) 

17 The Committee’s conclusion is based on CIA records, including statements from CIA Directors George Tenet and 
Porter Goss to the CIA inspector general, that the directors had not briefed the president on the CIA’s interrogation 
program. According to CIA records, when briefed in April 2006, the president expressed discomfort with the 
“image of a detainee, chained to the ceiling, clothed in a diaper, and forced to go to the bathroom on himself.” The 
CIA’s June 2013 Response does not dispute the CIA records, but states that “[w]hile Agency records on the subject 
are admittedly incomplete, former President Bush has stated in his autobiography that he discussed the program, 
including the use of enhanced techniques, with then-DCIA Tenet in 2002, prior to application of the techniques on 
Abu Zubaydah, and personally approved the techniques.” A memoir by former Acting CIA General Counsel John 
Rizzo disputes this account. 

18 CIA records indicate that the CIA had not informed policymakers of the presence of CIA detention facilities in 
Counfries |, | and |. It is less clear whether policymakers were aware of the detention facilities in Country | 
and at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The CIA requested that country names and information directly or indirectly 



TOP SE C RE T // 



Page 18 of 19 

UNCLASSIFIED 



^NOFORN 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP S ECRET// 



//NOFORN 



identifying countries be redacted. The Study therefore lists the countries by letter. The Study uses the same 
designations consistently, so “Country J,” torexample^refers to the same country throughout the Study. 

19 July 31 , 2003, email from John Rizzo to re Rump PC on interrogations. 

20 Lotus Notes messag e from Chief of the CIA Station in Country | to D/CTC^COPS^copied in: email from 

to [REDACTED], [REDACTED], cc: [REDACTED], 

IJJ^Tsubj^ADCI Talking Points for Call to DepSec Armitage, date 9/23/2004, at 7:40:43 PM 

21 Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation Program, July 29, 2003 

22 No CIA detention facilities were established in these two countries. 

23 U.S. law (22 U.S.C. § 3927) requires that chiefs of mission “shall be kept fully and currently informed with 
respect to all activities and operations of the Government within that country,” including the activities and 
operations of the CIA. 

24 Sametime communication, between John P. Mudd and April 13, 2005. 

25 Sametime communication, b etween John P. Mu dd and April 13, 2005. 

26 March 29, 200 2, email from to Interrogation Plan. 

27 ALEC (182321Z JUL 02) 

28 January 8, 1989, Letter from John L. Helgerson, Director of Congress ional Affa irs, to Vice Chairman William S. 

Cohen, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, re: SSCI Questions on at 7-8. 

29 [REDACTED] 1528 (191903Z DEC 03) 

30 Report of Audit, CIA-controlled Detention Facilities Operated Under the 17 September 2001 Memorandum of 
Notification, Report No. 2005-001 7- AS, June 14, 2006. 

3 ^pnH^2005^mai^rom [REDACTED] (Chief of Base of DETENTION SITE BLACK), to 

IHHHH’ re 

32 “Learned helplessness” in this context was the theory that detainees might become passive and depressed in 
response to adverse or uncontrollable events, and would thus cooperate and provide information. Memo from 
Grayson SWIGERT, Ph.D., February 1, 2003, “Qualifications to provide special mission interrogation consultation.” 

33 They also concluded that the CIA “should not be in the business of running prison^^temporary detention 
facilities.’” May 12, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from HIHHM Chief, 
Information Operations Center, and Henry Crumpton, Chief, National Resources Division via Associate Deputy 
Director for Operations, with the subject line, “Operational Review of CIA Detainee Program.” 

34 March 21, 2005, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Robert L. Grenier, Director DCI 
Counterterrorism Center, re Proposal for Full-Scope Independent Study of the CTC Rendition, Detention, and 
Interrogation Programs. 

35 September 2, 2005, Memorandum from to Director Porter Goss, CIA, “Assessment of EITs 

Effectiveness.” 

36 September 23, 2005, Memorandum from to The Honorable Porter Goss, Director, Central 

Intelligence Agency, “Response to reque st from Director fo r Assessment of EIT effectiveness.” 

37 February 10, 2006, Memorandum for ^1A OFFICER 1], CounterTerrorist Center, National 

Clandestine Service, from Executive Director re: Accountability Decision. 

38 Congressional notification, CIA Response to OIG Investigation Regarding the Rendition and Detention of 
German Citizen Khalid al-Masri, October 9, 2007. 

39 Memorandum for Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re Comments to 
Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7123-IG); date: February 
27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Activities. 

40 February 24, 2004, Memorandum from Scott W. Muller, General Counsel, to Inspector General re Interrogation 
Program Special Review (2003-7123-IG). 

41 November 9, 2006, email from John A. Rizzo, to Micha el V. Hayden, Stephen R. Kappes, cc: Michael Morell, 

jSGHHHIHIK Subject: Fw: 5 December 2006 Meeting with ICRC Rep. 

42 CIA Comments on the February 2007 ICRC Report on the Treatment of Fourteen “High Value Detainees” in CIA 
Custody.” 

43 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing transcript for April 12, 2007. 

44 DCIA Talking Points for 12 January 2006 Meeting with the President, re: Way Forward on Counterterrorist 
Rendition, Detention a nd Interr ogation Program. 

45 HEADQUARTERS ^^B(071742Z JUN 04) 

46 [REDACTED] 5759 03); ALEC (■jjj^^H 03); ALEC 03) 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 19 of 19 
UNCLASSIFIED 


















Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 



Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 



Executive Summary 



Approved December 13, 2012 
Updated for Release April 3,2014 
Declassification Revisions December 3, 2014 

TOP 

Page 1 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N Q F Q R N 



Table of Contents 



I. Background on the Committee Study 8 

II. Overall History and Operation of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 11 

A. September 17, 2001 , Memorandum of Notification (MON) Authorizes the CIA to Capture and Detain a 

Specific Category of Indi viduals 1 1 



1. After Considering Various Clandestine Detention Locations, the CIA Determines That a U.S. Military 
Bast^nht^Best Option'’; the CIA Delegates “ Blanket ” Detention Approvals to CIA Officers in 

■■■■ 11 

2. The CIA Holds at Least 21 More Detainees Than It Has Represented; At Least 26 CIA Detainees 

Wrongly Detained 14 



B. The Detention of Abu Zubaydah and the Development and Authorization of the CIA’s Enhanced 

Interrogation Techniques 17 

1. Past Experience Led the CIA to Assess that Coercive Interrogation Techniques Were 

“ Counterproductive ” and “Ineffective” ; After Issuance of the MON, CIA Attorneys Research Possible 
Legal Defense for Using Techniques Considered Torture; the CIA Conducts No Research on Effective 
Interrogations, Relies on Contractors with No Relevant Experience 1 7 

2. The CIA Renders Abu Zubaydah to a Covert Facility, Obtains Presidential Approval Without Inter- 

Agency Deliberation 21 

3. Tensions with Host Country Leadership and Media Attention Foreshadow Future Challenges 23 

4. FBI Officers Are the First to Question Abu Zubaydah, Who States He Intends to Cooperate; Abu 

Zubaydah is Taken to a Hospital Where He Provides Information the CIA Later Describes as 
“Important” and “Vital” 24 

5. While Abu Zubaydah is Hospitalized, CIA Headquarters Discusses the Use of Coercive Interrogation 

Techniques Against Abu Zubaydah 25 

6. New CIA Interrogation Plan Focuses on Abu Zubaydah’ s “ Most Important Secret”; FBI Temporarily 

Barred from the Questioning of Abu Zubaydah; Abu Zubaydah then Placed in Isolation for 47 Days 
Without Questioning 27 

7. Proposal by CIA Contract Personnel to Use SERE-Based Interrogation Techniques Leads to the 

Development of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; The CIA Determines that “the 
Interrogation Process Takes Precedence Over Preventative Medical Procedures” 31 

8. The CIA Obtains Legal and Policy Approval for Its Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; The CIA 

Does Not Brief the Presiden t 37 

9. The CIA Uses the Waterboard and Other Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Against Abu Zubaydah 

40 

10. A CIA Presidential Daily Brief Provides Inaccurate Information on the Interrogation of Abu 

Zubaydah 47 

11. The CIA Does Not Brief the Committee on the Interrogation of Abu Zubaydah 48 

C. Interrogation in Country | and the January 2003 Guidelines 49 



1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 
7. 



The CIA Establishes DETENTION SITE COBALT Places Inexperienced First-Tour Officer in Charge 

49 

CIA Records Lack Information on CIA Detainees and Details of Interrogations in Country | 50 

CIA Headquarters Recommends That Untrained Interrogators in Country | Use the CIA ’s Enhanced 

Interrogation Techniques on Ridha al-Najjar 51 

Death ofGul Rahman Leads CIA Headquarters to Learn of Unreported Coercive Interrogation 
Techniques at DETENTION SITE COBALT; CIA Inspector General Review Reveals Lack of Oversight 

of the Detention Site 54 

The CIA Begins Training New Interrogators; Interrogation Techniques Not Reviewed by the 

Department of Justice Included in the Training Syllabus 57 

Despite Recommendation from Cl A Attorneys, the CIA Fails to Adequately Screen Potential 

Interrogators in 2002 and 2003 58 

Bureau of Prisons “WOW’ed” by Level of Deprivation at CIA’s COBALT Detention Site 59 

mi 1 'ii i nr ii min 1 1 

Page 2 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



8. The CIA Places CIA Detainees in Country | Facilities Because They Did Not Meet the MON 

Standard for Detention 61 

9. DCl Tenet Establishes First Guidelines on Detention Conditions and Interrogation; Formal 

Consolidation of Program Administration at CIA Headquarters Does Not Resolve Disagreements 
Among CIA Personnel 62 

D. The Detention and Interrogation of ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri 66 

1. CIA Interrogators Disagree with CIA Headquarters About Al-Nashiri ’s Level of Cooperation; 

Interrogators Oppose Continued Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 66 

2. CIA Headquarters Sends Untrained Interrogator to Resume Al-Nashiri’ s Interrogations; Interrogator 

Threatens al-Nashiri with a Gun and a Drill 68 

3. CIA Contractor Recommends Continued Use of the CIA ’s Enhanced In terrogation Techniques Against 
Al-Nashiri; Chief Interrogator Threatens to Quit Because Additional Techniques Might “Push [Al- 
Nashiri] Over The Edge Psychologically, ” Refers to the CIA Program As a “Train Wreak [sic] 

Waiting to Happen’’ 70 

E. Tensions with Country | Relating to the CIA Detention Facility and the Arrival of New Detainees 73 

F. The Detention and Interrogation of Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh 75 

1. Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh Provides Information While in Foreign Government Custody , Prior to Rendition 

to CIA Custody 75 

2. Interrogation Plan for Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh Proposes Immediate Use of Nudity and Shackling with 

Hands Above the Head; Plan Becomes Template for Future Detainees 76 

3. CIA Headquarters Urges Continued Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, Despite 

Interrogators’ Assessment That Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh Was Cooperative 78 

4. Information Already Provided by Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh in the Custody of a Foreign Government 

Inaccurately Attributed to CIA Interrogations; Interrogators Apply the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques to Bin Al-Shibh When Not Addressed As “Sir” and When Bin Al-Shibh Complains of 
Stomach Pain 79 

G. The Detention and Interrogation of Klialid Shaykh Muhammad 81 

1. KSM Held in Pakistani Custody, Provides Limited Information; Rendered to CIA Custody at 

DETENTION SITE COBALT, KSM Is Immediately Subjected to the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques 81 

2. The CIA Transfers KSM to DETENTION SITE BLUE, Anticipates Use of the Waterboard Prior to His 

Arrival 83 

3. The CIA Waterboards KSM at Least 183 Times; KSM ’s Reporting Includes Significant Fabricated 

Information 85 

4. After the Use of the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Against KSM Ends, the CIA Continues 

to Assess That KSM Is Withholding and Fabricating Information 93 

H. The Growth of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 96 

1. Fifty-Three CIA Detainees Enter the CIA ’s Detention and Interrogation Program in 2003 96 

2. The CIA Establishes DETENTION SITE BLA CK in Country | and DETENTION SITE VIOLET in 

Country’ | 97 

3. At Least 17 CIA Detainees Subjected to the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Without CIA 

Headquarters A uthorization 99 

4. CIA Headquarters Authorizes Water Dousing Without Department of Justice Approval; Application of 

Technique Reported as Approximating Waterboarding 105 

5. Hambali Fabricates Information While Being Subjected to the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation 

Techniques 108 

6. After the Use of the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, CIA Headquarters Questions 

Detention of Detainee and Recommends Release; Detainee Transferred to U.S. Military Custody and 
Held for An Additional Four Years 109 



Page 3 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



T - QP S E G RET// 



mom RN 



7. A Year After DETENTION SITE COBALT Opens, the CIA Reports “Unsettling Discovery That We 



Are Holding a Number of Detainees About Whom We Know Very Little " 110 

8. CIA Detention Sites in Country | Lack Sufficient Personnel and Translators to Support the 

Interrogations of Detainees HI 

I. Other Medical, Psychological, and Behavioral Issues Ill 

1. CIA Interrogations Take Precedence Over Medical Care Ill 

2. CIA Detainees Exhibit Psychological and Behavioral Issues 113 

J. The CIA Seeks Reaffirmation of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program in 2003 115 

1. Administration Statements About the Humane Treatment of Detainees Raise Concerns at the CIA 

About Possible Lack of Policy Support for CIA Interrogation Activities 115 

2. The CIA Provides Inaccurate Information to Select Members of the National Security Council, 

Represents that “ Termination of This Program Will Result in Loss of Life, Possibly Extensive 
Policymakers Reauthorize Program 117 

K. Additional Oversight and Outside Pressure in 2004: ICRC, Inspector General, Congress, and the U.S. 

Supreme Court 1 19 



1. ICRC Pressure Leads to Detainee Transfers; Department of Defense Official Informs the CIA that the 

U.S. Government “ Should Not Be in the Position of Causing People to Disappear" ; the CIA Provides 
Inaccurate Information on CIA Detainee to the Department of Defense 119 

2. CIA Leadership Calls Draft Inspector General Special Review of the Program "Imbalanced and 

Inaccurate, ’’ Responds with Inaccurate Information; CIA Seeks to Limit Further Review of the CIA ’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program by the Inspector General 121 

3. The CIA Does Not Satisfy Inspector General Special Review Recommendation to Assess the 

Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 124 

4. The CIA Wrongfully Detains Khalid Al-Masri; CIA Director Rejects Accountability for Officer 

Involved 128 

5. Hassan Ghul Provides Substantial Information — Including Information on a Key UBL Facilitator — 

Prior to the CIA’s Use of Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 130 

6. Other Detainees Wrongfully Held in 2004; CIA Sources Subjected to the CIA ’s Enhanced 

Interrogation Techniques; CIA Officer Testifies that the CIA Is “Not Authorized’’ “to Do Anything 
Like What You Have Seen’’ in Abu Ghraib Photographs 133 

7. The CIA Suspends the Use of its Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, Resumes Use of the Techniques 

on an Individual Basis; Interrogations are Based on Fabricated, Single Source Information 134 

8. Country | Retains Individuals on the CIA 's Behalf. 139 

9. U.S. Supreme Court Action in the Case of Rasul v. Bush Forces Transfer of CIA Detainees from 

Guantanamo Bay to Country 140 

L. The Pace of CIA Operations Slows; Chief of Base Concerned About “Inexperienced, Marginal, 

Underperforming” CIA Personnel; Inspector General Describes Lack of Debriefers As “Ongoing Problem” 
143 



M. Legal and Operational Challenges in 2005 145 

1. Department of Justice Renews Approval for the Use of the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 

in May 2005 145 

2. Abu Faraj Al-Libi Subjected to the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Prior to Department of 

Justice Memorandum on U.S. Obligations Under the Convention Against Torture; CIA Subjects Abu 
Faraj Al-Libi to the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques When He Complains of Hearing 
Problems 146 

3. CIA Acquires Two Detainees from the U.S. Military 148 

4. The CIA Seeks “ End Game ” for Detainees in Early 2005 Due to Limited Support From Liaison 

Partners 149 

5. Press Stories and the CIA ’s Inability to Provide Emergency Medical Care to Detainees Result in the 

Closing of CIA Detention Facilities in Countries | and £ 151 



TOP SECRET// 



OTSfOFORN 



Page 4 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ / 



// N O FOR N 



6. The CIA Considers Changes to the CIA Detention and Interrogation Program Following the Detainee 



Treatment Act, Hamdan v. Rumsfeld 157 

N. The Final Disposition of CIA Detainees and the End of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program... 159 

1. President Bush Publicly Acknowledges the Existence of the CIA ’s Detention and Interrogation 

Program 159 

2. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Gains Access to CIA Detainees After Their 

Transfer to U.S. Military Custody in September 2006 160 

3. The CIA Considers Future of the Program Following the Military Commissions Act 161 

4. The CIA Develops Modified Enhanced Interrogation Program After Passage of the Military 

Commissions Act 162 

5. Muhammad Rahim, the CIA 's Last Detainee, is Subjected to Extensive Use of the CIA 's Enhanced 

Interrogation Techniques, Provides No Intelligence 163 

6. CIA After-Action Review of Rahim Interrogation Calls for Study of Effectiveness of Interrogation 

Techniques and Recommends Greater Use of Rapport-Building Techn iques in Fu ture CIA 
Interrogations 167 

7. CIA Contracting Expenses Related to Company Formed by SWIGERT and DUNBAR 168 

8. The CIA ’s Detention and Interrogation Program Ends 170 

III. Intelligence Acquired and CIA Representations on the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques to Multiple Constituencies 172 

A. Background on CIA Effectiveness Representations 172 

B. Past Efforts to Review the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 178 

C. The Origins of CIA Representations Regarding the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 

Techniques As Having “Saved Lives,” “Thwarted Plots,” and “Captured Terrorists” 179 

D. CIA Representations About the Effectiveness of Its Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Against Specific 

CIA Detainees 204 

1. Abu Zubaydah 204 

2. Khalid Shaykli Muhammad (KSM) 210 

E. CIA Effectiveness Claims Regarding a “High Volume of Critical Intelligence” 216 

F. The Eight Primary CIA Effectiveness Representations — the Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 

Techniques “Enabled the CIA to Disrupt Terrorist Plots” and “Capture Additional Terrorists” 217 

1. The Thwarting of the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings Plot and the Capture of Jose Padilla 225 

2. The Thwarting of the Karachi Plots 239 

3. The Thwarting of the Second Wave Plot and the Discoveiy of the Al-Ghuraba Group 246 

4. The Thwarting of the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot and the Capture of Dhiren Barot, aka Issa 

al-Hindi 258 

5. The Identification, Capture, and Arrest oflyman Faris 276 

6. The Identification, Capture, and Arrest ofSajid Badat 284 

7. The Thwarting of the Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf Plotting 294 

8. The Capture ofHambali 301 

G. CIA Secondary Effectiveness Representations — Less Frequently Cited Disrupted Plots, Captures, and 

Intelligence that the CIA Has Provided As Evidence for the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques 31 1 

1. The Identification of Khalid Shaykli Mohammad (KSM) as the Mastermind of the September 11, 2001, 

Attacks 312 

2. The Identification of KSM’s “Mukhtar” Alias 315 

3. The Capture ofRamzi bin al-Shibh 31 6 

4. The Capture of Khalid Shaykli Mohammad (KSM) 326 

5. The Capture of Majid Khan 334 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 5 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



6. The Thwarting of the Camp Lemonier Plotting 336 

7. The Assertion that CIA Detainees Subjected to Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Help Validate CIA 

Sources 342 

8. The Identification and Arrests of Uzhair and Saifullah Paracha 352 

9. Critical Intelligence Alerting the CIA to Jaffar al-Tayyar 358 

10. The Identification and Arrest of Saleh al-Marri 366 

11. The Collection of Critical Tactical Intelligence on Shkai, Pakistan 368 

12. Information on the Facilitator that Led to the UBL Operation 378 

IV. Overview of CIA Representations to the Media While the Program Was Classified 401 



A. The CIA Provides Information on the Still-Classified Detention and Interrogation Program to Journalists 
Who then Publish Classified Information; CIA Does Not File Crimes Reports in Connection with the Stories 
401 



B. Senior CIA Officials Discuss Need to “Put Out Our Story” to Shape Public and Congressional Opinion Prior 

to the Full Committee Being Briefed 402 

C. CIA Attorneys Caution that Classified Information Provided to the Media Should Not Be Attributed to the 

CIA 404 

D. The CIA Engages with Journalists and Conveys an Inaccurate Account of the Interrogation of Abu 

Zubaydah 405 

V. Review of CIA Representations to the Department of Justice 409 

A. August 1, 2002, OLC Memorandum Relies on Inaccurate Information Regarding Abu Zubaydah 409 

B. The CIA Interprets the August l, 2002, Memorandum to Apply to Other Detainees, Despite Language of the 

Memorandum; Interrogations of Abu Zubaydah and Other Detainees Diverge from the CIA’s 
Representations to the OLC 411 

C. Following Suspension of the Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, the CIA Obtains 

Approval from the OLC for the Interrogation of Three Individual Detainees 413 

D. May 2005 OLC Memoranda Rely on Inaccurate Representations from the CIA Regarding the Interrogation 

Process, the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, and the Effectiveness of the Techniques 419 

E. After Passage of the Detainee Treatment Act, OLC Issues Opinion on CIA Conditions of Confinement, 

Withdraws Draft Opinion on the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques After the U.S. Supreme Court 
Case of Hamdan v. Rumsfeld 428 

F. July 2007 OLC Memorandum Relies on Inaccurate CIA Representations Regarding CIA Interrogations and 

the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; CIA Misrepresents Congressional Views 
to the Department of Justice 431 

VI. Review of CIA Representations to the Congress 437 



A. After Memorandum of Notification, the CIA Disavows Torture and Assures the Committee Will Be Notified 

of Every Individual Detained by the CIA 437 

B. The CIA Notifies Committee of the Detention of Abu Zubaydah, but Makes No Reference to Coercive 

Interrogation Techniques; the CIA Briefs Chairman and Vice Chairman After the Use of the CIA’s 
Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; the CIA Discusses Strategy to Avoid the Chairman’s Request for More 
Information 437 



C. 

D. 

E. 



No Detailed Records Exist of CIA Briefings of Committee Leadership; the CIA Declines to Answer 



Questions from Committee Members or Provide Requested Materials 439 

Vice Chairman Rockefeller Seeks Committee Investigation 441 



In Response to Detainee Treatment Act, the CIA Briefs Senators Not on the Committee; Proposal from 
Senator Levin for an Independent Commission Prompts Renewed Calls Within the CIA to Destroy 
Interrogation Videotapes 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



Page 6 of 499 



443 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 




F. CIA Director Goss Seeks Committee Support for the Program After the Detainee Treatment Act; CIA 

Declines to Answer Questions for the Record 444 

G. Full Committee First Briefed on the CIA’s Interrogation Program Hours Before It Is Publicly Acknowledged 

on September 6, 2006 446 

H. The CIA Provides Additional Information to the Full Committee and Staff, Much of It Inaccurate; 

Intelligence Authorization Act Passes Limiting CIA Interrogations to Techniques Authorized by the Army 
Field Manual 449 

I. President Vetoes Legislation Based on Effectiveness Claims Provided by the CIA; CIA Declines to Answer 

Committee Questions for the Record About the CIA Interrogation Program 452 



VII. CIA Destruction of Interrogation Videotapes Leads to Committee Investigation; Committee Votes 14-1 for 



Expansive Terms of Reference to Study the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 455 

VIII. Appendix 1: Terms of Reference 457 

IX. Appendix 2: CIA Detainees from 2002 - 2008 458 

X. Appendix 3: Example of Inaccurate CIA Testimony to the Committee- April 12, 2007 462 




Page 7 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



I. Background on the Committee Study 



(U) On December 11, 2007, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (“the Committee”) 
initiated a review of the destruction of videotapes related to the interrogations of CIA detainees 
Abu Zubaydah and ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri after receiving a briefing that day on the matter by 
CIA Director Michael Hayden. At that briefing, Director Hayden stated that contemporaneous 
CIA operational cables were “a more than adequate representation of the tapes,” and he agreed to 
provide the Committee with limited access to these cables at CIA Headquarters. 

(U) On February 11, 2009, after the Committee was presented with a staff-prepared summary of 
the operational cables detailing the interrogations of Abu Zubaydah and al-Nashiri, the 
Committee began considering a broader review of the CIA’s detention and interrogation 
practices. On March 5, 2009, in a vote of 14 to 1, the Committee approved Terms of Reference 
for a study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 1 

(U) The Committee Study of the CIA ’s Detention and Interrogation Program is a lengthy, highly 
detailed report exceeding 6,700 pages, including approximately 38,000 footnotes. It is divided 
into three volumes: 



I. History and Operation of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. This 
volume is divided chronologically into sections addressing the establishment, 
development, and evolution of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. It 
includes an addendum on CIA Clandestine Detention Sites and the Arrangements Made 
with Foreign Entities in Relation to the CIA ’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 

II. Intelligence Acquired and CIA Representations on the Effectiveness of the CIA’s 
Enhanced Interrogation Techniques. This volume addresses the intelligence the CIA 
attributed to CIA detainees and the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
specifically focusing on CIA representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, as well as how the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program was operated and managed. It includes sections on CIA representations to the 
media, the Department of Justice, and the Congress. 

III. Detention and Interrogation of CIA Detainees. This volume addresses the detention 
and interrogation of 119 CIA detainees, from the program’s authorization on September 
17, 2001, to its official end on January 22, 2009, to include information on their capture, 
detention, interrogation, and conditions of confinement. It also includes extensive 
information on the CIA’s management, oversight, and day-to-day operation of its 
Detention and Interrogation Program. 

(U) On December 13, 2012, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence approved the 
Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program ("Committee Study") by a 
bipartisan vote of 9-6. The Committee Study included 20 findings and conclusions. The 



1 See Appendix 1: “Terms of Reference, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Study of the Central Intelligence 
Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program.’ 



TOP SECRET // 



// NOFORN 



Page 8 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 




Committee requested that specific executive branch agencies review and provide comment on 
the Committee Study prior to Committee action to seek declassification and public release of the 
Committee Study. On June 27, 2013, the CIA provided a written response, which was followed 
by a series of meetings between the CIA and the Committee that concluded in September 2013. 
Following these meetings and the receipt of Minority views, the Committee revised the findings 
and conclusions and updated the Committee Study. On April 3, 2014, by a bipartisan vote of 11- 
3, the Committee agreed to send the revised findings and conclusions, and the updated Executive 
Summary of the Committee Study, to the president for declassification and public release. 

(U) The Committee’s Study is the most comprehensive review ever conducted of the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. The CIA has informed the Committee that it has provided 
the Committee with all CIA records related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 2 
The document production phase lasted more than three years, produced more than six million 
pages of material, and was completed in July 2012. The Committee Study is based primarily on 
a review of these documents, 3 which include CIA operational cables, reports, memoranda, 
intelligence products, and numerous interviews conducted of CIA personnel by various entities 
within the CIA, in particular the CIA’s Office of Inspector General and the CIA’s Oral History 
Program, as well as internal email 4 and other communications. 5 

(U) The Executive Summary is divided into two parts. The first describes the establishment, 
development, operation, and evolution of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. The 
second part provides information on the effectiveness of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program, to include information acquired from CIA detainees, before, during, and after the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques; as well as CIA representations on the 
effectiveness and operation of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program to the media, the 
Department of Justice, and the Congress. The Executive Summary does not include a 

2 The Committee did not have access to approximately 9,400 CIA documents related to the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program that were withheld by the White House pending a determination and claim of executive 
privilege. The Committee requested access to these documents over several years, including in writing on January 
3, 2013, May 22, 2013, and December 19, 2013. The Committee received no response from the White House. 

3 From January 2, 2008, to August 30, 2012, the Department of Justice conducted a separate investigation into 
various aspects of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, with the possibility of criminal prosecutions of 
CIA personnel and contractors. On October 9, 2009, the CIA infonned the Committee that it would not compel CIA 
personnel to participate in interviews with the Committee due to concerns related to the pending Department of 
Justice investigations. ( See DTS #2009-4064.) While the Committee did not conduct interviews with CIA 
personnel during the course of this review, the Committee utilized previous interview reports of CIA personnel and 
CIA contractors conducted by the CIA’s Office of the Inspector General and the CIA’s Oral History Program. In 
addition to CIA materials, the Committee reviewed a much smaller quantity of documents from the Department of 
Justice, the Department of Defense, and the Department of State, as well as documents that had separately been 
provided to the Committee outside of this review. Inconsistent spellings found within the Committee Study reflect 
the inconsistencies found in the underlying documents reviewed. 

4 The CIA informed the Committee that due to CIA record retention policies, the CIA could not produce all CIA 
email communications requested by the Committee. As a result, in a few cases, the text of an email cited in the 
Study was not available in its original format, but was embedded in a larger email chain. For this reason, the 
Committee, in some limited cases, cites to an email chain that contains the original email, rather than the original 
email itself. 

5 The report does not review CIA renditions for individuals who were not ultimately detained by the CIA, CIA 
interrogation of detainees in U.S. military custody, or the treatment of detainees in the custody of foreign 
governments, as these topics were not incl uded in the Coinmittee’s Terms of Re ference. 




Page 9 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



description of the detention and interrogations of all 119 known CIA detainees. Details on each 
of these detainees are included in Volume in. 

(U) Throughout this summary and the entire report, non-supervisory CIA personnel have been 
listed by pseudonym. The pseudonyms for these officers are used throughout the report. To 
distinguish CIA officers in pseudonym from those in true name, pseudonyms in this report are 
denoted by last names in upper case letters. Additionally, the CIA requested that the names of 
countries that hosted CIA detention sites, or with which the CIA negotiated the hosting of sites, 
as well as information directly or indirectly identifying such countries, be redacted from the 
classified version provided to Committee members. The report therefore lists these countries by 
letter. The report uses the same designations consistently, so “Country J,” for example, refers to 
the same country throughout the Committee Study. Further, the CIA requested that the 
Committee replace the original code names for CIA detention sites with new identifiers. 6 



6 On April 7, 2014, the Executive Summary of the Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program was provided to the executive branch for declassification and public release. On August 1, 2014, the CIA 
returned to the Committee the Executive Summary with its proposed redactions. Over the ensuing months, the 
Committee engaged in deliberations with the CIA and the White House to ensure that the Committee’s narrative — 
and support for the Committee’s findings and conclusions — remained intact. Significant alterations have been made 
to the Executive Summary in order to reach agreement on a publicly releasable version of the document. For 
example, the CIA requested that in select passages, the Committee replace specific dates with more general time 
frames. The Committee also replaced the true names of some senior non-undercover CIA officials with 
pseudonyms. The executive branch then redacted all pseudonyms for CIA personnel, and in some cases the titles of 
positions held by the CIA personnel. Further, while the classified Executive Summary and full Committee Study 
lists specific countries by letter (for example “Country J”), and uses the same letter to designate the specific country 
throughout the Committee Study, the lette rs have been redacted by the executive branch for this public release. 

TOP 

Page 10 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



II. Overall History and Operation of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program 



A. September 17, 2001, Memorandum of Notification (MON) Authorizes the CIA to 
Capture and Detain a Specific Category of Individuals 

1. After Considering Various Clandestine Detention Locations, the CIA Determines That a 
U.S. Military Base Is the “BestOptkndjthe CIA Delegates “ Blanket ” Detention 
Approvals to CIA Officers in 

) On September 17, 2001, six days after the terrorist attacks of 
September 11, 2001, President George W. Bush signed a covert action Memorandum of 
Notification (MON) to authorize the director of central intelligence (DCI) to “undertake 
operations designed to capture and detain persons who pose a continuing, serious threat of 
violence or death to U.S. persons and interests or who are planning terrorist activities.” 7 
Although the CIA had previously been provided limited authorities to detain specific, named 
individuals pending the issuance of formal criminal charges, the MON provided unprecedented 
authorities, granting the CIA significant discretion in determining whom to detain, the factual 
basis for the detention, and the length of the detention. 8 The MON made no reference to 
interrogations or interrogation techniques. 9 

) On Septemb er 14, 2001, three days before the issuance of the 
MON, the chief of operations of the CIA’s IHIHHBI based on an urgent requirement from 
the chief of the Counterterrorism Center (CTC), sent an email to CIA Stations in |mH seeking 
input on appropriate locations for potential CIA detention fac ilities. 1 0 Over the course of the 
next month, CIA officers considered at le ast four c ountries in mill and one in UmiHiH as 
possible hosts for detention facilities and HHHI at ^ east ^ ree P ro P ose ^ s i te locations. 11 

(TSflmmm^) On September 26, 2001, senior CTC p ersonnel met to discuss the 
capture and detain a uthorities in the MON. On September 28, 2001, |^^^HCTC Legal, 
ESSftflW?8Sgi|| . sent an email describing the meeting and a number of policy decisions. The 



7 September 17, 2001, Memorandum of Notification, for Members of the National Security Council, re. 

8 Attachment 5 to May 14, 2002, letter from Stanley Moskowitz, CIA Office of Congressional Affairs, to A1 
Cumming, Staff Director, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, transmitting the^| Memoranda of Notification 
(DTS #2002-2175). 

9 September 17, 2001, Memorandum of Notification, for Members of the National Security Council, re. 



#2002-0371), at p aragraph 4. 

‘“DIRECTOR^mi (imiH)'’ email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Cable re 
Country |; date: January 29, 2009. 

11 Memorandum for DCI from J. Cofer Black, Director of Counterterrorism, via Deputy Director of Central 
Intelligence, General Counsel, Executive Director, Deputy Director for Operations and Associate Director of Central 
Intelligence/Military Support, entitled, “Approval to Establish a Detention Facility for Terrorists.” 




Page 1 1 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOF - SEGRET// 



//NOFORN 



email stated that covert facilities would be operated “in a manner consistent with, but not 
pursuant to, the formal provision of appropriately comparable Federal instructions for the 
operation of prison facilitie^tncHhe incarceration of inmates held under the maximum lawful 
security mechanisms.” email recognized the CIA’s lack of experience in running 

detention facilities, and stated that the CIA would consider acquiring cleared personnel from the 
Department of Defense or the Bureau of Prisons with specialized expertise to assist the CIA in 
operating the facilities. 12 On September 27, 2001, CIA Headquarters informed CIA Stations that 
any future CIA detention facility would have to meet “U.S. POW Standards.” 13 



(TS^IHHHP/NF) In early November 2001, CIA Headquarters further determined 
that any future CIA detention facility would have to meet U.S. prison standards and that CIA 
detention and interrogation operations should be tailored to “meet the requirements of U.S. law 
and the federal rules of criminal procedure,” adding that “[sjpecific methods of interrogation 
w[ould] be permissible so long as they generally comport with commonly accepted practices 
deemed lawful by U.S. courts.” 14 The CIA’s search for detention site locations was then put on 
hold and an internal memorandum from senior CIA officials explained that detention at a U.S. 
military base outside of the United States was the “best option.” 15 The memorandum thus urged 
the DCI to “[p]ress DOD and the US military, at highest levels, to have the US Military agree to 
host a long-term facility, and have them identify an agreeable location,” specifically requesting 
that the DCI “[s]eek to have the US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay designated as a long-term 
detention facility.” 16 



Addressing the risks associated with the CIA maintaining a 
detention facility, the CIA memorandum warned that “[a]s captured terrorists may be held days, 
months, or years, the likelihood of exposure will grow over time,” and that “[mjedia exposure 
could inflame public opinion against a host government and the U.S., thereby threatening the 
continued operation of the facility.” The memorandum also anticipated that, “[i]n a foreign 
country, close cooperation with the host government will entail intensive negotiations.” 17 The 
CIA memorandum warned that “any foreign country poses uncontrollable risks that could create 
incidents, vulnerability to the security of the facility, bilateral problems, and uncertainty over 
maintaining the facility.” 18 The memorandum recommended the establishment of a “short-term” 
facility in which the CIA’s role would be limited to “oversight, funding and responsibility.” The 



12 Email from: 



|; to: [REDACTED]; subject: EYES ONLY - Capture and Detention; date: 



September 28, 2001, at 09:29:24 AM. 
13 DIRECTOR ■ 



H (2721 19Z SEP 01) 

14 November 7, 2001, Draft of Legal Appendix, “Handling Interrogation.” See also Volume I. 

15 Memorandum for DCI from J. Cofer Black, Director of Counterterrorism, via Deputy Director of Central 
Intelligence, General Counsel, Executive Director, Deputy Director for Operations and Associate Director of Central 
Intelligence/Military Support, entitled, “Approval to Establish a Detention Facility for Terrorists.” 

16 Memorandum for DCI from J. Cofer Black, Director of Counterterrorism, via Deputy Director of Central 
Intelligence, General Counsel, Executive Director, Deputy Director for Operations and Associate Director of Central 
Intelligence/Military Support, entitled, “Approval to Establish a Detention Facility for Terrorists.” 

17 Memorandum for DCI from J. Cofer Black, Director of Counterterrorism, via Deputy Director of Central 
Intelligence, General Counsel, Executive Director, Deputy Director for Operations and Associate Director of Central 
Intelligence/Military Support, entitled, “Approval to Establish a Detention Facility for Terrorists.” 

18 Memorandum for DCI from J. Cofer Black, Director of Counterterrorism, via Deputy Director of Central 

Intelligence, General Counsel, Executive Director, Deputy Director for Operations and Associate Director of Central 
Intelligence/Military Support, entitled, “ApprovaDt^isrt^ for Terrorists.” 

mi 1 ''ii i r i iifhi 

Page 12 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



CIA would “contract out all other requirements to other US Government organizations, 
commercial companies, and, as appropriate, foreign governments.” 19 

On October 8, 2001, DCI George Tenet delegated the management 
and oversight of the capture and detention authorities provided by the MON to the CIA’s deputy 
director for operations (DDO), James Pavitt, and the CIA’s chief of the Counterterrorism Center, 
Cofer Black. 20 The DCI also directed that all requests and approvals for capture and detention be 
documented in writing. On December 17, 2001, however, the DDO rescinded t hese 
requirements and issued via a CIA cable “blanket approval” for CIA officers in HIHH t0 
“determine [who poses] the requisite ‘continuing serious threat of violence or death to US 
persons and interests or who are planning terrorist activities.’” 21 By March 2002, CIA 
Headquarters had expanded the authority beyond the language of the MON and instructed CIA 
personnel that it would be appropriate to detain individuals who might not be high-value targets 
in their own right, but could provide information on high-value targets. 22 

On April 2003, ^^■■CTC Legal, 

sent a cable to CIA Stations and Bases stating that “at this stage in the war [we] believe there is 
sufficient opportunity in advance to document the key aspects of many, if not most, of our 
capture and detain operations.” 23 cable also provided guidance as to who could 

be detained under the MON, stating: 

“there must be an articulable basis on which to conclude that the actions of a 
specific person whom we propose to capture and/or detain pose a ‘continuing 
serious threat’ of violence or death to U.S. persons or interests or that the person 
is planning a terrorist activity. 

. . .We are not permitted to detain someone merely upon a suspicion that he or 
she has valuable information about terrorists or planned acts of terrorism. ... 

Similarly, the mere membership in a particular group, or the mere existence of a 
particular familial tie, does not necessarily connote that the threshold of 
‘continuing, serious threat’ has been satisfied.” 24 



19 Memorandum for DCI from J. Cofer Black, Director of Counterterrorism, via Deputy Director of Central 
Intelligence, General Counsel, Executive Director, Deputy Director for Operations and Associate Director of Central 
Intelligence/Military Support, entitled, “Approval to Establish a Detention Facility for Terrorists.” 

20 Memorandum from George Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence, to Deputy Director for Operations, October 8, 
2001, Subject: (U) Dele gations of Authorities. 

171410Z DEC 01) 

(272040Z MAR 02) 

(0722 16Z APR 03) 



21 DIRECTOR 

22 WASHINGTON 

23 DIRECTOR 

24 DIRECTOR 



n from Geoq 
(U)Delegati< 
■■(171 

'om| 

jggjl(072 

^■(072 



|CTC Legal, 



(0722 16Z APR 03). In a later meeting with Committee staff, | 
stated that the prospect that the CIA “could hold [detainees] forever” was “terrifying ,” adding, “[n]o 
one wants to be in a position of being called back from retirement in however many years to go figure out what do 
you do with so and so who still poses a threat.” See November 13, 2001, Transcript of Staff Briefing on Covert 
Action Legal Issues (DTS #2002-0629). 

TOP SECRE T4^^^Mm^^MB# NOFORN 

Page 13 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 



2. The CIA Holds at Least 21 More Detainees Than It Has Represented; At Least 26 CIA 
Detainees Wrongly Detained 



While the CIA has represented in public and classified settings that 
it detained “fewer than one hundred” individuals, 25 the Committee’s review of CIA records 
indicates that the total number of CIA detainees was at least 119. 26 Internal CIA documents 
indicate that inadequate record keeping made it impossible for the CIA to determine how many 
individuals it had detained. In December 2003, a CIA Station overseeing CIA detention 
operations in Country | informed CIA Headquarters that it had made the “unsettling discovery” 
that the CIA was “holding a number of detainees about whom” it knew “very little.” 27 Nearly 
five years later, in late 2008, the CIA attempted to determine how many individuals the CIA had 
detained. At the completion of the review, CIA leaders, including CIA Director Michael 
Hayden, were informed that the review found that the CIA had detained at least 112 individuals, 
and possibly more. 28 According to an email summarizing the meeting, CIA Director Hayden 



25 CIA Director Hayden typically described the program as holding “fewer than a hundred” detainees. For example, 
in testimony before the Committee on February 4, 2008, in response to a question from Chairman Rockefeller 
during an open hearing, Hayden stated, “[i]n the life of the CIA detention program we have held fewer than a 
hundred people.” ( See DTS #2008-1 140.) Specific references to “98” detainees were included in a May 5, 2006, 
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) report on Renditions, Detentions and Interrogations. 
See also Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. Other examples of this CIA 



representation include a statement by CTC officer 



statement by 



:TC Legal 



to the HPSCI on February 15, 2006, and a 
to the SSC1 on June 10, 2008. See DTS #2008-2698. 



26 The Committee’s accounting of the number of CIA detainees is conservative and only includes individuals for 
whom there is clear evidence of detention in CIA custody. The Committee thus did not co unt, among the 1 19 
detainees^six of the 31 individuals listed in a memo entitled “Updated List of Detainees In P 
HU,” attached to a March 2003 email sent by DETENTION SITE COBALT site manager | 

[CIA OFFICER 1], because they were n ot explicitly describ ed as CIA detainees an d because they d i d no t otherwise 
appear in CIA records 
and 




(See email from: 

| subject: 



[CIA OFFIC ER l];to:| 

DETAINEES; date: March 13, 2003.) An 
additional individual is the subject of CIA cables describing a planned transfer from U.S. military to CIA custody at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT. He was likewise not included among the 119 CIA detainees because of a lack of 
CIA records confinning either his transfer to, or his presence at, DETENTION SITE COBALT. As detailed in this 
summary, in December 2008, the CIA attempted to identify the total number of CIA de tainees. In a grap h prepared 
for CIA leadership, the CIA represented the number of CIA detainees as “1 12+ ?” See 



(I01719Z OCT 02); ALEC 
(301226Z OCT 02). 



(232056Z OCT 02); 



190159 (240508Z OCT 02); and ALEC 




1528 



As of June 27, 2013, when the CIA provided its Response to the Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program (hereinafter, the “CIA’s June 2013 Response”), the CIA had not yet made an independent 
determination of the number of individuals it had detained. The CIA’s June 2013 Response does not address the 
number of detainees determined by the Committee to be held by the CIA, other than to assert that the discrepancy 
between past CIA representations, that there were fewer than 100 detainees, and the Committee’s determination of 
there being at least 1 19 CIA detainees, was not “substantively meaningful.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response states 
that the discrepancy “does not impact the previously known scale of the program,” and that “[i]t remains true that 
approximately 100 detainees were part of the program; not 10 and not 200.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response also 
states that, “[t]he Study leaves unarticulated what impact the relatively small discrepancy might have had on 
policymakers or Congressional overseers.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response further asserts that, at the time Director 
Hayden was representing there had been f ewer than 100 detainees (2007-2009), the CIA’s internal research 

llll II III I — II |»| 

Page 14 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET# 



//NOFQRN 



instructed a CIA officer to devise a way to keep the number of CIA detainees at the same number 
the CIA had previously briefed to Congress. The email, which the briefer sent only to himself, 
stated: 



“I briefed the additional CIA detainees that could be included in RDI 29 
numbers. DCIA instructed me to keep the detainee number at 98 — pick 
whatever date i [sic] needed to make that happen but the number is 98. ” 30 



While the CIA acknowledged to the House Permanent Select 
Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) in February 2006 that it had wrongly detained five 
individuals throughout the course of its detention program, 31 a review of CIA records indicates 



“indicate[d] the total number of detainees could have been as high as 1 12,” and that “uncertainty existed within CIA 
about whether a group of additional detainees were actually part of the program, partially because some of them had 
passed through [DETENTION SITE COBALT] prior to the formal establishment of the program under CTC 
auspices on 3 December 2002” (emphasis added). This June 27, 2013, CIA statement is inaccurate: the CIA’s 
determination at the time was that there had been at least 1 12 CIA detainees and that the inclusion of detainees held 
prior to December 3, 2002, would make that number higher. On December 20, 2008, a CTC officer informed the 
chief of CTC that “112 were detained by CIA since September 11, 2001,” noting “[t]hese revised statistics do not 
include any detainees at [DETENTION SITE COBALT] (other than Gul Rahman) who departed [DETENTION 
SITE COBALT] prior to RDG assuming authority of [DETENTION SITE COBALT] as of 03 December 2002.” 




numbers brief.doc,’ 
I, [REDACTED], 



attached to email from 




; subject: Revised Rendition and Detention 



Statistics; date: December 20, 2008.) By December 23, 2008, CTC had created a graph that identified the total 
number of CIA detainees, excluding Gul Rahman, “Post 12/3/02” as 1 1 1 . The graph identified the total number 
including Gul Rahman, but excluding other detainees “pre-12/3/02” as “112+ ?.” ( See CIA-produced PowerPoint 
Slide, RDG Numbers, dated December 23, 2008.) With regard to the Committee’s inclusion of detainees held at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT prior to December 3, 2002, the CIA does not dispute that they were held by the CIA 
pursuant to the same MON authorities as detainees held after that date. Moreover, the CIA has regularly counted 
among its detainees a number of individuals who were held solely at DETE NTION SITE COB ALT prior to 
December 3, 2002, as well as several who were held exclusively at Country ^^^IHHK'acilities on behalf of 
the CIA. In discussing the role of DETENTION SITE COBALT in the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 
then Deputy Director of Operations James Pavitt told the CIA Office of Inspector General in August 2003 that 
“there are those who say that [DETENTION SITE COBALT] is not a CIA facility, but that is ‘bullshit.’” (See 
Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, James Pavitt, August 21, 
2003.) 

29 The “Renditions and Interrogations Group,” is also referred to as the “Renditions Group,” the “Rendition, 



“RDI,” and “RDG” in CIA records. 



Detention, and Interrogation Grou 
30 Email from: to: 



[[Himself]; subject: Meeting with DCIA; date: January 5, 
2009. According to the CIA’s June 2013 Response, “Hayden did not view the discrepancy, if it existed, as 
particularly significant given that, if true, it would increase the total number by just over 10 percent.” 

31 They include Sayed Habib, who was detained due to fabrica tions made by KSM whileJKSM^wasJ^e^ 
to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techni 
3031 




14322 Modin Nik 

Muhammed, whom the CIA deterininedhadbeenpurposefully misidentified b^^ourc^u^^i blood feud 

DIRECTOR ■■ |; 

Khal id al-Masri, whose “prolonged detention” was determined by the CIA 
Inspector General to be “unjustified” (CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation, The Rendition and 
Detention of German Citizen Khalid al-MasrH200^760MG)^ul^6^007^t 83); and Zarmein, who was one of 

m i 1 1 m i i mi him i 

Page 15 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



that at least 21 additional individuals, or a total of 26 of the 1 19 (22 pereent) CIA detainees 
identified in this Study, did not meet the MON standard for detention. 32 This is a conservative 
calculation and includes only CIA detainees whom the CIA itself determined did not meet the 
standard for detention. It does not include individuals about whom there was internal 
disagreement within the CIA over whether the detainee met the standard or not, or the numerous 
detainees who, following their detention and interrogation, were found not to “pose a continuing 
threat of violence or death to U.S. persons and interests” or to be “planning terrorist activities” as 
required by the September 17, 2001, MON. 33 With one known exception, there arc no CIA 



“a number of detainees about whom” the CIA knew “very little” (| 



1528 



' 2 They include Abu Hudhaifa, who was subjected to ice water baths and 66 hours of standing sleep deprivation 
before being releasec^T^austMht^^Wliscovered he was 1 i kelynotthepersoi^e was believed to be 
(WASHINGTON 51303 Muhammad Khan, who, like 

Zarmein, w as am ong detainees about whom the CIA acknowledged knowing “‘very little” 

1528 Gul Rahman, another case of mistaken identity (HEADQUARTERS | 

); Shaistah Habibo I la^I^iio^whtKlike his brother, Sayed Habib, was the subject of fabrications 
by KSM (HEADQUARTER^^^Hm^|^^^^H|); Haj^jhalgi^hi^as detained as “useful leverage” 
against a family member (H^^^I^^^HiH33678 IHIH1HH)' Nazar Ali, an “intellectually 
challenged” individual wh ose taped crying was used as leverage against his family member (I 
1 3065 ■■■■flTl 47 

1 29864 Ilium I nil dm was released with a 

50822Z | 

33265 | 

li, whom the CIA determined “may have been in the 
33322 ■■^^■kAli Jan, who was detained 




[other currency 



mtullah Hat 




)ayment 

33693 
33693 

wrong place at the wrong time” 

for using a satellite p hone, traces on which “revealed no derogatory information” 1542 

|); two individuals ^ — Mohammad al-Shomaila and Salah Nasir Salim Ali — on 
whom derogatory information was “speculative” (email from: [RE DACTED!; t o: [RE DACTED!, [REDAC TED], 
and [REDACTED |; subjec t: Backgrounders; date: April 19, 2006; 17411 ALEC 

undated document titled, “Talking Points for HPSCI about Former CIA Detainees”); 
two individuals who were discovered to be foreign government sources prior to being rendered to CIA custody , and 
later determined to be former CIA source;G^pAflH||^^^^^| 2185 ([RE DACTED]); ALECP 
([REDACTED!); HEADQUARTERS ^BH([REDACTED|)); seven individuals! 
thought to be travelling to Iraq to join al-Qa’ida who were detained based on claims that were “thin but cannot be 
ignored” (email from: [ RED ACTED |; to : [REDACTED|; cc: [REDACTED!, [REDACTED], HHHHH' 
[REDACTED!. I REDACTED!, [REDACTED], [REDACTED!; 

subject: Request Chief/CTC Approval to Apprehend and Detain Individuals Departing Immi nently for Iraq to Fi ght 
Again st US Forces; date: Septe mbe r 16, 2003); and Bismullah, who was mista kenly arrested 

and later rele ased with and told not to speak about his experience 46620 

33 For example, the Committee did not include among the 26 individuals wrongfully detained: Dr. Hikmat Nafi 
Shaukat, even though it was determined that he was not involved in CBRN ef forts and his involvement w ith al- 
ia’ ida members wa s limited to p ersonal relationships with for mer neighbors 30414 

\\ DIRECTOR Karim, aka Asat Sar Jan, about whomquestions 
wereraised within the CIA about whet her he may have been sl andered by a rival tri bal faction (| 

1 27931 ■■■H* [REDACTED] Memo, SUBJECT: getting a handle on 

detainees); Arsala Khan, who suffered disturbing hallucinations after 56 hours of standing sleep depri vation, after 
which the CIA determined thathe“doesnota^^ the subject involved in... current plans or acti vities aga inst 

l^^^onneW^cilities” (HHHIiHlHHI 1 393 (201006Z OCT 03); HEADQUARTERS ■■ 
(■■■■■); and Janat Gul, who also suffered “frightful” hallucinations following sleep deprivation and 
about whom the chief of the detention facility wrote, “[tjhere simply is no ‘smoking gun’ that we ca n refer to that 
would justify our continued holding of [Ja nat Gul | at a site such as [DETENTIO N SITE BLACK |” (| 

mi mum i mi nun 

Page 1 6 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T# 



MVQFORN 



records to indicate that the CIA held personnel accountable for the detention of individuals the 
CIA itself determined were wrongfully detained. 34 

0° at l east f° ur occasions, the CIA used host country detention 
sites in Country | to detain individuals on behalf of the CIA who did not meet the MON 
standard for capture and detention. ALEC Station officers at CIA Headquarters explicitly 
acknowledged that these detainees did not meet the MON standard for detention, and 
recommended placing the individuals in host country detention facilities because they did not 
meet the standard. The host country had no independent reason to detain these individuals and 
held them solely at the behest of the CIA. 35 



B. The Detention of Abu Zubaydah and the Development and Authorization of the CIA’s 
Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 

1. Past Experience Led the CIA to Assess that Coercive Interrogation Techniques Were 
“ Counterproductive ” and “Ineffective After Issuance of the MON, CIA Attorneys 
Research Possible Legal Defense for Using Techniques Considered Torture; the CIA 
Conducts No Research on Effective Interrogations, Relies on Contractors with No 
Relevant Experience 



At the time of the issuance of the September 17, 2001, MON — 
which, as noted, did not reference interrogation techniques — the CIA had in place long-standing 
formal standards for conducting interrogations. The CIA had shared these standards with the 



1530 



1537 



from: [REDACTED] (COB [DETENTION SITE BLACK]); to: 




04); email 



|; subject: re | 



| date: April 30, 2005). 



34 The CIA’s June 2013 Response “acknowledge^] that there were cases in which errors were made,” but points 
only to the case of Khalid al-Masri, whose wrongful detention was the subject of an Inspector General review. The 
CIA’s June 2013 Response does not quantify the number of wrongfully detained individuals, other than to assert that 
it was “far fewer” than the 26 documented by the Committee. The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that 
“the Agency frequently moved too slowly to release detainees,” and that “[o]f the 26 cases cited by the Study, we 
adjudicated only three cases in less than 31 days. Most took three to six months. CIA should have acted sooner.” 

As detailed in the Study, there was no accountability for personnel responsible for the extended detention of 
individuals determined by the CIA to have been wrongfully detained. 



35 ALEC 
ALEC 




; DIRECTOR 



; DIRECTOR 



Despite the CIA’s conclusion that these individuals did not meet the 
standard for detention, these individuals were included in the list of 26 wrongfully detained if they were released, 
but not if they were transferred to the custody of another country. The list thus does not include Hamid Aich, 
although CIA Headquarters recognized that Aich did not meet the threshold for unilateral CIA custody, and sought 



)lace him in Coun try 



Hamid Aich was transferred to Country | 




custody where the CIA could still debrief him. ( See DIRECTOR 



custod 



[another country’s] custody more than a month later. (See 
38836 1 




|, 2003, and 



36682 



|). The list also does not include 
Mohammad Dinshah, despite a determination prior to his capture that the CIA “does not view Dinshah as meeting 
the ‘continuing serious threat’ threshold required for this operation to be conducted pursuant to [CIA] authority,” 
and a determination, after his capture, that “he does not meet the strict standards requir ed to go to [DETENTION 
SITE COBALT].” (See DI RECTOR 
Dinshah was transferred to 




41204 

TOP SECRE T /; 



/NOFOR N 



Page 17 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SE C RET // 



//NOFORN 



Committee. In January 1989, the CIA informed the Committee that “inhumane physical or 
psychological techniques are counterproductive because they do not produce intelligence and 
will probably result in false answers.” 36 Testimony of the CIA deputy director of operations in 
1988 denounced coercive interrogation techniques, stating, “[pjhysical abuse or other degrading 
treatment was rejected not only because it is wrong, but because it has historically proven to be 
ineffective.” 37 By October 2001, CIA policy was to comply with the Department of the Army 
Field Manual “Intelligence Interrogation.” 38 A CIA Directorate of Operations Handbook from 
October 2001 states that the CIA does not engage in “human rights violations,” which it defined 
as: “Torture, cruel, inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment, or prolonged detention without 
charges or trial.” The handbook further stated that “[i]t is CIA policy to neither participate 
directly in nor encourage interrogation which involves the use of force, mental or physical 
torture, extremely demeaning indignities or exposure to inhumane treatment of any kind as an 
aid to interrogation.” 39 

(U) The CIA did, however, have historical experience using coercive forms of interrogation. In 
1963, the CIA produced the KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation Manual, intended as a 
manual for Cold War interrogations, which included the “principal coercive techniques of 
interrogation: arrest, detention, deprivation of sensory stimuli through solitary confinement or 
similar methods, threats and fear, debility, pain, heightened suggestibility and hypnosis, narcosis 
and induced regression.” 40 In 1978, DCI Stansfield Turner asked former CIA officer John 
Limond Hart to investigate the CIA interrogation of Soviet KGB officer Yuri Nosenko 41 using 
the KUBARK methods — to include sensory deprivation techniques and forced standing. 42 In 
Hart’s testimony before the House Select Committee on Assassinations on September 15, 1978, 
he noted that in his 31 years of government service: 

“It has never fallen to my lot to be involved with any experience as unpleasant 
in every possible way as, first, the investigation of this case, and, second, the 
necessity of lecturing upon it and testifying. To me it is an abomination, and I 



36 January 8, 1989, Letter from John L. Helgerson, Director of Congress ional Affa irs, to Vice Chairman William S. 

|, at 7-8 (DTS #1989-0131). 



Cohen, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, re: SSCI Questions on 

37 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of Richard Stolz, Deputy Director for Operations, Central 
Intelligence Agency (June 17, 1988), p. 15 (DTS #1988-2302). 

38 Attachment to Memorandum entitled, “Approval to Establish a Detention Facility for Terrorists,” CTC: 
1026(138)/01 from J. Cofer Black, Director of DCI Counterterrorist Center, to Director of Central Intelligence via 
multiple parties, October 25, 2001 ; Draft of Legal Appendix, “Handling Interrogations.” 

39 Directorate of Operations Handbook, 50-2, Section XX(l)(a), updated October 9, 2001. 

40 KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation, July 1963, at 85. 

41 According to public records, in the mid-1960s, the CIA imprisoned and interrogated Yuri Nosenko, a Soviet KGB 
officer who defected to the U.S. in early 1964, for three years (April 1964 to September 1967). Senior CIA officers 
at the time did not believe Nosenko was an actual defector and ordered his imprisonment and interrogation. 

Nosenko was confined in a specially constructed “jail,” with nothing but a cot, and was subjected to a series of 
sensory deprivation techniques and forced standing. 

42 Among other documents, see CIA “Family Jewels” Memorandum, 16 May 1973, pp. 5, 23-24, available at 
www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NS AEBB/NSAEBB222^mil^ewels^dl^crpdf 

III! ill III I ' lllllllllll 

Page 1 8 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 




am happy to say that. . . it is not in my memory typical of what my colleagues 
and I did in the agency during the time I was connected with it.” 43 

Notwithstanding the Hart investigation findings, just five years 
later, in 1983, a CIA officer incorporated significant portions of the KUBARK manual into the 
Human Resource Exploitation (HRE) Training Manual, which the same officer used to provide 
interrogation training in LatinAmencaintheeaHyl980^and which was used to 
interrogation training to the in 198I- 44 CIA officer 

was involved in the HRE training and conducted interrogations. The CIA inspector general later 
recommended that he be ora lly admonished for inappropriate use of interrogation techniques. 45 
In the fall of 2002, became the CIA’s chief of interrogations in the CIA’s Renditions 

Group, 46 the officer in charge of CIA interrogations 47 

Despite the CIA’s previous statements that coercive physical and 
psychological interrogation techniques “result in false answers” 48 and have “proven to be 
ineffective,” 49 as well as the aforementioned early November 2001 determination that “[sjpecific 
methods of interrogation w[ould] be permissible so long as they generally comport with 
commonly accepted practices deemed lawful by U.S. courts,” 50 by the end of November 2001, 
CIA officers had begun researching potential legal defenses for using interrogation techniques 
that were considered torture by foreign governments and a non-governmental organization. On 
November 26, 2001, attorneys in the CIA’s Office of General Counsel circulated a draft legal 
memorandum describing the criminal prohibition on torture and a potential “novel” legal defense 
for CIA officers who engaged in torture. The memorandum stated that the “CIA could argue that 
the torture was necessary to prevent imminent, significant, physical harm to persons, where there 
is no other available means to prevent the harm,” adding that “states may be very unwilling to 
call the U.S. to task for torture when it resulted in saving thousands of lives.” 51 An August 1, 




43 “Investigation of the Assassination of President John F. Kennedy,” Hearings before the Select Committee on 
Assassinations of U.S. House of Representatives, 95 th Congress, Second Session, September 1 1-15, 1978. 

Testimony of John Hart, pp. 487-536 (September 15, 1978) (DTS #Q04761). 

44 Transcript of Committee Hearing on Interrogation Manual, June 17, 1988, pp. 3-4 (DTS #1988-2302). 

45 April 13, 1989, Memorandum from CIA Ins pector Gen eral William F. Donnelly to Jim Currie and John Nelson, 

SSC1 Staff, re: Answers to SSC1 Que stions on^^^HE attachment M to Memorandum to Chairman an d Vice 
Chairman, re: Inquiry into Interrogation Training, July 10, 1989 (DTS # 1989-0675). See also 

||Ml984 i Memorandum for Inspector General from [REDACTED], Inspector, via Deputy Inspector General, re: 
■■■■, IG-®j84. 

46 As noted, the Renditions Group was also known during the program as the “Renditions and Interrogations 
Group,” as well as the “Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Group,” and by the initials, “RDI” and “RDG.” 

47 December 4, 2002, Training ReporfRevisedVersion, High Value Target Interrogation and Exploitation (HVTIE) 
Training Seminar 12-18 Nov 02 (“iHIHH^ was recently assigned to the CTC/RG to manage the HVT 
Interrogation and Exploitation (HVTIE) mission, assuming the role as HVT interrogator/Team Chief.”). 

48 January 8, 1989, Letter from John L. Helgerson, Director of CongressionalAffairs to Vice Chairman William S. 
Cohen, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence re: SSCI Questions on m, at 7-8 (DTS #1989-0131). 

49 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of Richard Stolz, Deputy Director for Operations, Central 
Intelligence Agency (June 17, 1988), at 15 (DTS #1988-2302). 

50 November 7, 2001, Draft of Legal Appendix, “Handling Interrogation.” See also Volume I. 

51 November 26, 2001 , Draft of Legal Appendix, “Hostile Interrogations: Legal Considerations for CIA Officers.” 
The draft memo cited the “Israeli example” as a possible basis for arguing that “torture was necessary to prevent 
imminent, significant, physical harm to persons, where there is no other available means to prevent the harm.” 




Page 19 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



flNOFORN 



2002, OLC memorandum to the White House Counsel includes a similar analysis of the 
“necessity defense” in response to potential charges of torture. 52 

(TO/^mmiH^F) In January 2002, the National Security Council principals began to 
debate whether to apply the protections of the Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of 
Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949 (“Geneva”) to the conflict with al-Qa’ida and the Taliban. 

A letter drafted for DCI Tenet to the president urged that the CIA be exempt from any 
application of these protections, arguing that application of Geneva would “significantly hamper 
the ability of CIA to obtain critical threat information necessary to save American lives.” 53 On 
February 1, 2002 — approximately two months prior to the detention of the CIA’s first detainee — 
a CIA attorney wrote that if CIA detainees were covered by Geneva there would be “few 
alternatives to simply asking questions.” The attorney concluded that, if that were the case, 

“then the optic becomes how legally defensible is a particular act that probably violates the 
convention, but ultimately saves lives.” 54 

On February 7, 2002, President Bush issued a memorandum stating 
that neither al-Qa’ida nor Taliban detainees qualified as prisoners of war under Geneva, and that 
Common Article 3 of Geneva, requiring humane treatment of individuals in a conflict, did not 
apply to al-Qa’ida or Taliban detainees. 55 

From the issuance of the MON to early 2002, there are no 
indications in CIA records that the CIA conducted significant research to identify effective 
interrogation practices, such as conferring with experienced U.S. military or law enforcement 
interrogators, or with the intelligence, military, or law enforcement services of other countries 
with experience in counterterrorism and the interrogation of terrorist suspects. 56 Nor are there 
CIA records referencing any review of the CIA’s past use of coercive interrogation techniques 
and associated lessons learned. The only research documented in CIA records during this time 
on the issue of interrogation was the preparation of a report on an al-Qa’ida manual that was 



52 Memorandum for Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President, re: Standards of Conduct for Interrogation under 

18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A. Like the November 26, 2001, draft memo, the OLC memorandum addressed the Israeli 
example. 

53 Email frouu^^HH^^H; to: [REDACTED] cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], Jose 
Rodriguez, ^^^^^■■jREDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED]; subject: For OOB Wednesday - Draft Letter to the President; date: January 29, 2002. No records 
have been identified to indicate th at this letter was or w as not sent. 

54 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: an( I [REDACTED]; subject: POW’s and Questioning; date: 

February 1, 2002, at 01:02:12 PM. 

55 February 7, 2002, Memorandum for the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the 
Attorney General, chief of staff to the President, Director of Central Intelligence, Assistant to the President for 
National Security Affairs, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, re. Humane Treatment of al Qaeda and Taliban 
Detainees. 

56 After the CIA was unsuccessful in acquiring information from its last detainee, Muhammad Rahim, using the 

CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, an after-action review in April 2008 suggested that the CIA conduct a 
survey of interrogation techniques used by other U.S. government agencies and ot her countrie s in an effort to 
develop effective interrogation techniques. See undated CIA Memorandum, titled After-Action Review, 

author [REDACTED], and undated CIA Memorandum, titled [Rahim] After Action Review: HVDI Assessment, 
with attached addendum, [Rahim] Lessons Learned Review Panel Recommendations Concerning the Modification 
of Sleep Deprivation and Reinstatement of Wallin^^i^IT^Foradditionalinf^ see Volume I. 

lorsiit 

Page 20 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NOFORN 



initially assessed by the CIA to include strategies to resist interrogation. This report was 
commissioned by the CIA’s Office of Technical Services (OTS) and drafted by two CIA 
contractors, Dr. Grayson SWIGERT and Dr. Hammond DUNBAR. 57 

Both SWIGERT and DUNBAR had been psychologists with the 
U.S. Air Force Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) school, which exposes select 
U.S. military personnel to, among other things, coercive interrogation techniques that they might 
be subjected to if taken prisoner by countries that did not adhere to Geneva protections. Neither 
psychologist had experience as an interrogator, nor did either have specialized knowledge of al- 
Qa’ida, a background in terrorism, or any relevant regional, cultural, or linguistic expertise. 
SWIGERT had reviewed research on “learned helplessness,” in which individuals might become 
passive and depressed in response to adverse or uncontrollable events. 58 He theorized that 
inducing such a state could encourage a detainee to cooperate and provide information. 59 

2. The CIA Renders Abu Zubaydah to a Covert Facility, Obtains Presidential Approval 
Without Inter-Agency Deliberation 

In late March 2002, Pakistani government authorities, working 
with the CIA, captured al-Qa’ida facilitator Abu Zubaydah in a raid during which Abu Zubaydah 
suffered bullet wounds. At that time, Abu Zubaydah was assessed by CIA officers in ALEC 
Station, the office within the CIA with specific responsibility for al-Qa’ida, to possess detailed 
knowledge of al-Qa’ida terrorist attack plans. However, as is described in greater detail in the 
full Committee Study, this assessment significantly overstated Abu Zubaydah’ s role in al-Qa’ida 
and the information he was likely to possess. 60 



57 Grayson SWIGERT and Hammond DUNBAR, Recognizing and Developing Countermeasures to A1 Qaeda 
Resistance to Interrogation Techniques: A Resistance Training Perspective (undated). See also Memorandum for 
the Record, November 15, 2007, SSCI Staff Briefing with Grayson SWIGERT and Hammond DUNBAR (DTS 
#2009-0572). 



58 



See, for example, | 




, Memo from Grayson SWIGERT, subject, “Qualifications to provide special 
mission interrogation consultation”; Undate d, untitled memo stating: “The following information was obtained by a 
teleph o ne conver sation with [REDACTED], f 

, Interrogator Training, Lesson Plan, Title: A Scientific Approach to Successful Interrogation; DIR 
|(03 1 227Z APR 02). 

Hi, subject: “Qualifications to provide special 



59 See, for example, Memo from Grayson SWIGERT, IBHi 
mission interrogation consultation.” 

60 See detainee review of Abu Zubaydah in Volume III. See also CIA Intelligence Assessment, August 16, 2006, 

“Countering Misconceptions About Training Camps in Afghanistan, 1990-2001.” The document states: “Khaldan 
Not Affiliated With Al-Qa’ida. A common misperception in outside articles is that Khaldan camp was run by al- 
Qa’ida. Pre-1 1 September 2001 reporting miscast Abu Zubaydah as a ‘senior al-Qa’ida lieutenant,’ which led to the 
inference that the Khaldan camp he was administering was tied to Usama bin Laden. The group’s flagship camp, al- 
Faruq, reportedly was created in the late 1980s so that bin Laden’s new organization could have a training 
infrastructure independent of ‘Abdullah Azzam’s Maktab al-Khidamat, the nongovernmental organization that 
supported Khaldan. Al-Qa’ida rejected Abu Zubaydah’s request in 1993 to join the group and Khaldan was not 
overseen by bin Laden’s organization. There were relations between the al-Qa’ida camps and Khaldan. Trainees, 
particularly Saudis, who had finished basic training at Khaldan were referred to al-Qa’ida camps for advanced 
courses, and Khaldan staff observed al-Qa’idatrainim^ did not exchange trainers.” 

1(11 l( III I M ( HIM 

Page 21 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET// 



//NOFORN 



On the day that Abu Zubaydah was captured, CIA attorneys 
discussed interpretations of the criminal prohibition on torture that might permit CIA officers to 
engage in certain interrogation activities. 61 An attorney in CTC also sent an email with the 



subject line “Torture Update” to 



|, listing, without 



|CTC Legal 

commentary, the restrictions on interrogation in the Geneva Conventions, the Convention 
Against Torture, and the criminal prohibition on torture. 62 



l ate March 2002, anticipating its eventual custody of Abu 
Zubaydah, the CIA began considering options for his tran sfer to CIA cus tody and detention 
under the MON. The CIA rejected U.S. military custody mm, in large part because of 
the lack of security and the fact that Abu Zubaydah would have to be declared to the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). 63 The CIA’s concerns about custody at 
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, included the general lack of secrecy and the “possible loss of control to 
US military and/or FBI.” 64 Rendition to Country | was rejected because of the perception that 
the results of that country’s recent interrogations had been disappointing, as well as the intense 
interest in Abu Zubaydah from CIA leadership. As ALEC Station wrote, the CIA needed to 
participate directly in the interrogation, “[n]ot because we believe necessarily we can improve on 
[Country |] performance, but because the reasons for the lack of progress will be transparent 
and reportable up the line.” 65 

Over th e course of four days, the CIA settled on a detention sit e in 
Country | because of that country’s 

and the lack of U.S. court jurisdiction. The only disadvantages identified by the CIA with 
detention in Country | were that it would not be a “USG-controlled facility” and that 
“diplomatic/policy decisions” would be required. 66 As a March 28, 2002, CLA document 
acknowledged, the proposal to render Abu Zubaydah to Country | had not yet been broached 
with that country’s officials. The document also warned: “[w]e can’t guarantee security. If AZ’s 
presence does become known, not clear what the impact would be.” 67 



The decision to detain Abu Zubaydah at a covert detention facility 
in Country | did not involve the input of the National Security Council Principals Committee, 
the Department of State, the U.S. ambassador, or the CIA chief of Station in Country |. 68 On 
March 29, 2002, an email from the Office of the Deputy DCI stated that “[w]e will have to 



61 March 29, 2002, email from [REDACTED] to|HHI^^^H> cc: John Rizzo, [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], subject, NEW INFO: A-Z Interrogation Plan (“I have thought about the 18 USC 
sect. 2340 issues we briefly discus sed yesterday.’*). 

62 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: subject: Torture Update; date: March 28, 2002, at 1 1:28:17 

A M. 

63 19595 (281 106Z MAR 02). PowerPoint presentation, Options for Incarcerating Abu Zubaydah, March 27, 
2002. 



64 PowerPoint presentation, Options for Incarcerating Abu Zubaydah, March 27, 2002. PowerPoint presentation, 
Options for Incar cerating Abu Zubaydah, March 28, 2002. 

65 ALEC ■ 



| (282105Z MAR 02) 

66 PowerPoint presentation, Options for Incarcerating Abu Zubaydah, March 27, 2002. 

67 PowerPoint presentation, Options for Incarcerating Abu Zubaydah, March 28, 2002. 



68 Email from: [REDACTED] 



GREEN] Briefing for Armitage; date: Sep tember 26, 2002; DIRECTOR 

TOP SECRET/ 

Page 22 of 499 



; to: James Pavitt; subject: DC I Decision on [DET ENTION SITE 

VtH|MAR02). 



//NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



momm 



acknowledge certain gaps in our planning/preparations, but this is the option the DDCI will lead 
with for POTUS consideration.” 69 That morning, the president approved moving forward with 
the plan to transfer Abu Zubaydah to Country |. 70 During the same Presidential Daily Brief 
(PDB) session, Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld suggested exploring the option of putting Abu 
Zubaydah on a ship; however, CIA records do not indicate any further input from the 
principals. 71 That da y, the CIA Station in Country | obtained the approval of Country |’s 
BI9HSMIIHI9 officials for the CIA detention site. 72 The U.S. deputy chief of mission in 
Country who was notifiedbytheCIAStationafter^ leadership, concurred in the 

absence of the ambassador, Shortly thereafter, Abu 

Zubaydah was rendered from Pakistan to Country^ where he was held at the first CIA 
detention site, referred to in this summary as “DETENTION SITE GREEN.” 74 CIA records 
indicate that Country | was the last location of a CIA detention facility known to the president 
or the vice president, as subsequent locations were kept from the principals as a matter of White 
House policy to avoid inadvertent disclosures of the location of the CIA detention sites. 75 

3. Tensions with Host Country Leadership and Media Attention Foreshadow Future 
Challenges 



sl^^ 

the detention facility, linked its su 
support fr om the CIA 
requested ^^BlH su PP ort; > 

According to CIA cables and internal documents, 



after the rend ition of Abu Zubaydah to DETENTION 
, which was responsible for the security of 
ort for the CIA’s deten tion site to a request for BBHH1 

The CIA eventually provided the 



69 Gmail from: IHHHHIH’ to: HUHRI. subject: A-Z Interrogation Plan; date: March 29, 2002. 
POTUS is an abbreviation for Pre sident of the United States. 

70 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: subject: NEW INFO: A-Z Interrogation Plan; date: March 29, 

2002. 

71 Email from: [REDACTE D]; to: BBHHHK subject: A-Z Interrogation Plan; email from: 

[REDACTED] I^HH; to: James Pavitt; subject: DCI Decision on [DETENTION SITE GREEN^riefing for 
Armitage; date: September 26, 2002. After the PDB session, the assistant secretary of state was 

briefed. The assistant secretary indicated that he would brief the secretary and deputy secretary of state. An internal 
CIA email stated that at the NSC, only Nationa l Security A dvisor Rice and Deputy National SecurityAdvisor 
Hadley were briefed. See DIRECTOR HB MAR 02); email from: [REDACTED] to: 

James Pavitt; date: September 26, 2002. 

72 [REDACTED] 69132 MAR 02) 

73 [REDACTED] 69132 MAR 02) 

74 For additional information on the rendition of Abu Zubaydah and the establishment of DETENTION SITE 
GREEN, see Volume I. 

75 HEADQUARTERS [REDACTED]; HEADQUARTERS ■■■■HUHI- CIA records 

indicate that the CIA had not informed policymakers of die presence of CIA detention facilities in Countries |, | 

and |. It is less clear whether policymakers were aware of the detention facilities in Country | and at Guantanamo 
Bay, Cuba. 

76 See . for example, [REDACTED] 70240 (300614Z APR 02); [REDACTED] 70112 (250929Z APR02)^^^^ 
[REDACTED] 70459 (080545Z MAY 02); Congressional Notification: Intelligence Support to 



| Operation, 

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence; FROM: 

SUBJECT: Your meeting with 
2002; cover page dated 2002. 

TOP SECRET/, 

Page 23 of 499 



, 2002 (DTS #2002-2932); and 






7NOFQRN 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O FORN 




to replace 

individuals responsible for supporting 

the CIA’s detention facility. 77 Those officials were replaced by different officials whom the CIA 
believed were not supportive of the CIA’s detention site. 78 Despite considerable effort by the 



CIA’s Station in Countr 
partners, 



to retain sin 




ort for DETENTION SITE GREEN from its new 

called for the closing of the CIA detention facility 

within three weeks. 79 Continued lobbying by the chief of Station, however, eventually led 
Country | to reverse this decision, allowing DETENTION SITE GREEN to remain 
operational. 80 



On April 2002, the CIA Station in Country | attempted to list 
the number of Country | officers who, “[t]o the best of Station’s knowledge,” had “knowledge 
of the presence of Abu Zubaydah” in a specifi c city in Country M- T he list included ei ght 
individuals, references to “vario us” personnel and the “staff’ of H| 

■HHHH. and concluded “[djoubtless many others.” 81 By April B, 2002, 
a media organization had learned that Abu Zubaydah was in Country |, prompting the CIA to 
explain to the media organization the “security implications” of revealing the information. 82 The 
CIA Station in Country | also expressed concern that press inquiries “would do not hing for our 
liaison and bilateral relations, possibly diminishing chances that [the of Country 

|] will permit [Abu Zubaydah] to remain in country or that he would accept other [Abu 
Zubaydah] -like renderees in the future.” 83 In November 2002, after the CIA learned that a major 
U.S. newspaper knew that Abu Zubaydah was in Country |, senior CIA officials, as well as Vice 
President Cheney, urged the newspaper not to publish the information. 84 While the U.S. 
newspaper did not reveal Country ( as the location of Abu Zubaydah, the fact that it had the 
information, combined with previous media interest, resulted in the decision to close 
DETENTION SITE GREEN. 85 



4. FBI Officers Are the First to Question Abu Zubaydah, Who States He Intends to 

Cooperate; Abu Zubaydah is Taken to a Hospital Where He Provides Information the 
CIA Later Describes as “ Important ” and "Vital” 

(TS/f|Hpmm//NF) After Abu Zubaydah was rendered to DETENTION SITE GREEN 
on MarchJ, 2002, he was questioned by special agents from the Federal Bureau of 



77 See, for example. [REDACIBD]74636HH|^^H. 

78 [REDACTED] 76975 wmmmgmmrn 

79 [REDACTED] 77115 

80 [REDACTED] 77281 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[i]t was only as leaks 

detailing the program began to emerge that foreign partners felt compelled to alter the scope of their involvement.” 
As described, however, the tensions with Co untry | were unrelated to public revelations about the program. 

81 [REDACTED] 69626 

82 Email from: William Harlow, Director of the CIA Office of Public Affairs; to: John McLaughlin, Buzzy 
Krongard, John Moseman, John Rizzo, James Pavitt, [REDACTED], Stanley Moskowitz; subject: [REDACTED] 
call Re: Abu Zubaydah; datejApnl25 i 2002, 12:06:33 PM. 

83 [REDACTED] 70168^HHH|H 

84 ALEC 6, 2006, Interview, Chief, Renditions and 



Detainees Group. 
85 DIRECTOR ■ 




TOP SECRET/, 



/NOFORN 



Page 24 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET -// 



//NOFORN 



Investigation (FBI) who spoke Arabic and had experience interrogating members of al-Qa’ida. 
Abu Zubaydah confirmed his identity to the FBI officers, informed the FBI officers he wanted to 
cooperate, and provided background information on his activities. That evening, Abu 
Zubaydah’ s medical condition deteriorated rapidly and he required immediate hospitalization. 
Although Abu Zubaydah was largely unable to communicate because of a breathing tube, he 
continued to provide information to FBI and CIA officials at the hospital using an Arabic 
alphabet chart. According to records, the FBI officers remained at Abu Zubaydah’ s bedside 
throughout this ordeal and assisted in his medical care. When Abu Zubaydah’ s breathing tube 
was removed on April 8, 2002, Abu Zubaydah provided additional intelligence and reiterated his 
intention to cooperate. 86 

During an April 10, 2002, debriefing session, conducted in the 
hospital’s intensive care unit, Abu Zubaydah revealed to the FBI officers that an individual 
named “Mukhtar” was the al-Qa’ida “mastermind” of the 9/1 1 attacks. Abu Zubaydah identified 
a picture of Mukhtar provided by the FBI from the FBI’s Most Wanted list. The picture was of 
Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM), who had been indicted in 1996 for his role in Ramzi 
Yousef’s terrorist plotting to detonate explosives on 12 United States-flagged aircraft and destroy 
them mid-flight over the Pacific Ocean. 87 Abu Zubaydah told the interrogators that “Mukhtar” 
was related to Ramzi Yousef, whom Abu Zubaydah said was in an American jail (Yousef had 
been convicted for the aforementioned terrorist plotting and was involved in the 1993 World 
Trade Center terrorist attack). 88 

Abu Zubaydah told the FBI officers that “Mukhtar” trained the 
9/11 hijackers and also provided additional information on KSM’s background, to include that 
KSM spoke fluent English, was approximately 34 years old, and was responsible for al-Qa’ida 
operations outside of Afghanistan. 89 Subsequent representations on the success of the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program consistently describe Abu Zubaydah’ s identification of 
KSM’s role in the September 11, 2001, attacks, as well as his identification of KSM’s alias 
(“Mukhtar”), as being “important” and “vital” information. 90 A review of CIA records found 
that this information was corroborative of information already in CIA databases. 91 

5. While Abu Zubaydah is Hospitalized, CIA Headquarters Discusses the Use of Coercive 
Interrogation Techniques Against Abu Zubaydah 



86 



1 10005 (0923 16Z APR 02). See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume HI for additional 

information. 

87 See United States Court of Appeals, August Term, 2001, U.S. v Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, and DIRECTOR | 




CIA 



MAR 02). 



| JAN 02). See also \ 

10022 (121216Z APR 02). CIA records include the variant spelling, “Muhktar.” KSM was placed on 
the FBI’s public “Most Wanted Terrorist” list on October 10, 2001. See also U.S. Department of Justice materials 
related to Ramzi Ahmed Yousef. 

10022 (121216Z APR 02); 



■i 18334 (261703Z M AR 02) 

See, for example. President Bush’s September 6, 2006, speech, based on CIA information and vetted by the CIA, 
which stated that Abu Zubaydah provided “quite important” information and “disclosed Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, 
or KSM, was the mastermind behind the 9/1 1 attacks and used the alias Mukhtar. This was a vital piece of the 
puzzle that helped our intelligence community pursue KSM.” 

91 See information later in this summary an d Volume II for additional details. 

Illl I I III I 

Page 25 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



(T&4^^|^^^^H//NF) While Abu Zubaydah was still hospitalized, personnel at CIA 
Headquarters began discussing how CIA officers would interrogate Abu Zubaydah upon his 
return to DETENTION SITE GREEN. The initial CIA interrogation proposal recommended that 
the interrogators engage with Abu Zubaydah to get him to provide information, and suggested 
that a “hard approach,” involving foreign govemmen^ersonnel, be taken^onlyasal^ 
resort.” 92 At a meeting about this proposal, ^B^^HCTC Legal, 

recommended that a psychologist working on contract in the CIA’s Office of Technical Services 
(OTS), Grayson SWIGERT, be used by CTC to “provide real-time recommendati ons to 
overcome Abu ZubaydalT^sistance to interrogation.” 93 SWIGERT had come to 
attention through who worked in OTS. Shortly thereafter, CIA 

Headquarters formally proposed that Abu Zubaydah be kept in an all-white room that was lit 24 
hours a day, that Abu Zubaydah not be provided any amenities, that his sleep be disrupted, that 
loud noise be constantly fed into his cell, and that only a small number of people interact with 
him. CIA records indicate that these proposals were based on the idea that such conditions 
would lead Abu Zubaydah to develop a sense of “learned helplessness.” 94 CIA Headquarters 
then sent an interrogation team to Country |, including SWIGERT, whose initial role was to 
consult on the psychological aspects of the interrogation. 95 

DCI Tenet was provided an update on the Abu Zubaydah 
interrogation plans on April 12, 2002. The update stated that the CIA team was preparing for 
Abu Zubaydah’ s transfer back to DETENTION SITE GREEN, and noted the CIA interrogation 
team intended to “set the stage” and increase control over Abu Zubaydah 96 The update stated: 

“Our [CIA] lead interrogator will require Abu Zubaydah to reveal the most 
sensitive secret he knows we are seeking; if he dissembles or diverts the 
conversation, the interview will stop and resume at a later time.... In 
accordance with the strategy, and with concurrence from FBI Headquarters, 
the two on-site FBI agents will no longer directly participate in the 
interview/debriefing sessions.” 97 



92 Attachment to email from: [REDACTED] [REDACTED]; to: 



Strategy, Powerpoint on 
31,2002. 

93 Email from [REDACTED] to [REDACTED], cc: 



|; subject: Interrogation 



[Abu Zubaydah] Interrogation Strategy, 01 April 2002; date: March 



|, April 1, 2002, re: POC for [Grayson 



SWIGERT]- consultant who drafted al-Qa’ida resistance to interrogation backgrounder (noting tha t CTC/L GL 
woulcHeach out to SWIGERT). According to the email, after the meeting, ||jB||^!TC Legal, 
HHHH, provided SWIGERT’s contact information to ALEC Station officers, noting that it was SWIGERT 
who composed an OTS assessment on al-Qa’ida resistance techniques. 

94 On the evening of April 1, 2002, “at the request of CTC/OPS and ALEC” Station, a cable from OTS with a 



178955 (012236Z APR 02). The information in 



proposed interrogation strategy was sent to Country | (| 
this cable was consistent with a subsequent cable, which was coordinated with SWIGERT, that proposed “several 
environmental modifications to create an atmosphere that enhances the strategic interrogation process.” The cable 
noted, “[t|he deliberate manipulation of the environment is intended to cause psychological disorientation, and 
reduced psychological wherewithal for the interrogation,” as well as “the deliberate establishment of psychological 
dependence upon the interrogator,” and “an increased sense of learned helplessness.” ( See [REDACTED] 69500 
(070009Z APR 02).) For detailed information, see Volume I and the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III. 



95 



DIRECTOR 



■ APR 02) 

96 CIA Sensitive Addendum “Update on the Abu Zubaydah Operation,” dated 12 April 2002, “1630 Hours.” 

97 CIA Sensitive Addendum “Update on the Abu Zubaydah Operation,” dated 12 April 2002, “1630 Hours.” 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 26 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



The FBI special agents questioning Abu Zubaydah at the hospital 
objected to the CIA’s plans. In a message to FBI Headquarters, an FBI special agent wrote that 
the CIA psychologists had acquired “tremendous influence.” 98 The message further stated: 



“AZ’s health has improved over the last two days and AgencWCI^ is ready 
to move [Abu Zubaydah] out of the hospital and back tof^^^^^on 
BUM in an elaborate plan to change AZ’s environment. Agency [CIA] 
advised this day that they will be immediately changing tactics in all future AZ 
interviews by having only there [sic] [CIA officer] interact with AZ (there will 
be no FBI presence in interview room). This change contradicts all 
conversations had to date.... They believe AZ is offering, ‘throw away 
information’ and holding back from providing threat information (It should be 
note [sic] that we have obtained critical information regarding AZ thus far and 
have now got him speaking about threat information, albeit from his hospital 
bed and not [an] appropriate interview environment for full follow-up (due to 
his health). Suddenly the psychiatric team here wants AZ to only interact with 
their [CIA officer, and the CIA sees this] as being the best way to get the threat 
information.... We offered several compromise solutions... all suggestions 
were immediately declined without further discussion. . . .This again is quite 
odd as all information obtained from AZ has come from FBI lead interviewers 
and questioning. ... I have spent an un-calculable amount of hours at [Abu 
Zubaydah’ s] bedside assisting with medical help, holding his hand and 
comforting him through various medical procedures, even assisting him in 
going [to] the bathroom.... We have built tremendous report [sic] with AZ and 
now that we are on the eve of ‘regular’ interviews to get threat information, we 
have been ‘written out’ of future interviews.” 99 

6. New CIA Interrogation Plan Focuses on Abu Zubaydah’ s “ Most Important Secret”; FBI 
Temporarily Barred from the Questioning of Abu Zubaydah; Abu Zubaydah then Placed 
in Isolation for 47 Days Without Questioning 



On April 13, 2002, while Abu Zubaydah was still at the hospital, 
the CIA implemented the “new interrogation program.” 100 This initial meeting was held with 
just one interrogator in the room and lasted 1 1 minutes. A cable stated that the CIA interrogator 
was coached by the “psychological team.” 101 The CIA interrogator advised Abu Zubaydah that 
he (Abu Zubaydah) “had a most important secret that [the interrogator] needed to know.” 
According to the cable, Abu Zubaydah “amazingly” nodded in agreement about the secret, but 



98 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A 1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS 
#2010-2939). 

99 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS 



#2010-2939). 
100 I 




10026 (131233Z APR 02) 
10026 (131233Z APR 02) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



Page 27 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



“did not divulge any information, as (the interrogation team] cxpceted.” 102 A eablc further 
explained that Abu Zubaydah indieated that he understood that the key question was about 
“impending future terrorist plans against the United States,’’ 103 and that the CIA officer told Abu 
Zubaydah to signal for him “when he decides to discuss that ‘one key item he knows he is 
keeping from the [interrogator]. ”’ 104 The FBI officers provided a similar account to FBI 
Headquarters, adding that: “We spent the rest of the day in the adjoining room with | the CIA 
officer] and one of the psychiatrists [REDACTED] waiting for (Abu Zubaydah] to signal he was 
ready to talk. [Abu Zubaydah] apparently went to sleep... they did not approach | Abu 
Zubaydah] the rest of the day.” I(b In their communications with FBI Headquarters, the FBI 
officers wrote that they explained their rapport-building approaches to the CIA interrogation 
team and “tried to explain that we have used this approach before on other Al-Qaeda members 
with much success (al-Owhali, 106 KKM, Jandal, Badawi etc.). Wc tried to politely suggest that 
valuable time was passing where we could attempt to solicit threat information....’’ 107 




delivered what a CIA cable described as “the pre-move message” to Abu Zubaydah: that “time is 
running out,” that his situation had changed, and that the interrogator was disappointed that Abu 
Zubaydah did not signal “to discuss the one thing he was hiding.” 108 Abu Zubaydah was sedated 
and moved from the hospital to DETENTION SITE GREEN. When Abu Zubaydah awoke at 
1 1 :00 PM, four hours after his arrival, he was described as surprised and disturbed by his new 
situation. An April 16, 2002, cable states the “objective is to ensure that |Abu Zubaydah] is at 
his most vulnerable state.” 109 

A cable described Abu Zubaydah’ s cell as white with no natural 
lighting or windows, but with four halogen lights pointed into the cell. 110 An air conditioner was 
also in the room. A white curtain separated the interrogation room from the cell. The 
interrogation cell had three padlocks. Abu Zubaydah was also provided with one of two chairs 
that were rotated based on his level of cooperation (one described as more comfortable than the 
other). Security officers wore all black uniforms, including boots, gloves, balaclavas, and 
goggles to keep Abu Zubaydah from identifying the officers, as well as to prevent Abu Zubaydah 
“from seeing the security guards as individuals who he may attempt to establish a relationship or 
dialogue with.” 111 The security officers communicated by hand signals when they were with 



10026 (131233Z APR 02) 

10029 (131 505Z APR 02) 

10029 ( 13 1505Z APR 02) 

105 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS 
#2010-2939). 

106 See Intelligence Science Board “Intelligence Interviewing: Teaching Papers and Case Studies” for additional 
details on the FBI’s interrogation of Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-Owhali. 

107 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS 

#2 010-2939). 

108 ■ 

109 I 

I 10 I 
Ml I 

ini II III I — " |||( » ||(>I1111 

Page 28 of 499 



10043 (15161 4Z APR 02) 
10047 (161406Z APR 02) 
101 16 (25073 1Z APR 02) 
10053 (162029Z APR 02) 




UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - S ECRET// 



flNQFORN 



Abu Zubaydah and used hand-cuffs and leg shackles to maintain control. In addition, either loud 
rock music was played or noise generators were used to enhance Abu Zubaydah’ s “sense of 
hopelessness.” 112 Abu Zubaydah was typically kept naked and sleep deprived. 113 

An April 16, 2002, cable explained that the interrogation strategy 
had shifted since Abu Zubaydah’ s medical condition prevented “total isolation as originally 
planned.” According to the cable, a 24-hour interrogation strategy was now “deemed to be the 
best approach” for acquiring information. As a result, the FBI officers were once again allowed 
to question Abu Zubaydah. 114 On April 17, 2002, an FBI officer met with Abu Zubaydah for six 
hours. 115 FBI records state that Abu Zubaydah had “not seen the interviewing (FBI) agent” since 
April 11, 2002, but that Abu Zubaydah greeted the agent by name. 116 During the questioning 
Abu Zubaydah denied any knowledge related to specific targets for a pending attack and 
“advised that many of the brothers on the front lines (nfi) [no further information] talked about 
all types of attacks against America but that for the most part this was usually just talk and that 
[the United States] should not be concerned about this type of talk.” 117 Abu Zubaydah provided 
information on al-Qa’ida, KSM, his past travel to the United States, as well as general 
information on extremists in Pakistan. 118 

Abu Zubaydah continued to provide information to interrogators 
throughout April 2002, but not information on pending attacks against the United States. On the 
evening of April 20, 2002, Abu Zubaydah told the FBI officers about two men who approached 
him with a plan to detonate a uranium-based explosive device in the United States. Abu 
Zubaydah stated he did not believe the plan was viable and did not know the names of the two 
individuals, but provided physical descriptions of the pair. 119 This information was acquired 
after Abu Zubaydah was confronted with emails indicating that he had sent the two individuals 
to KSM. 120 The CIA would later represent that this information was acquired “as a result” of the 
use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and that the information acquired resulted in 



10116 (25073 1Z APR 02). CIA reco rds indicate that Abu Zubaydah was nude, but given a towel to 
cover himself when interrogated. See, for exam 



10053 (162029Z APR 02); 





10080 (200735Z APR 02). 

10094 (21 1905Z APR 02). As detailed in Volume III, the FBI 
Special Agents only questioned Abu Zubaydah when he was covered with a towel. Sleep deprivation during this 
period also differed from how sleep deprivation was implemented after the Department of Justice approved the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in August 2002. Rather than being placed in a stress position during sleep 
deprivation, Abu Zubaydah was kept awake by being questioned nearly non-stop by CIA and FBI interrogators. 
Records further indicate that during breaks in the interrogations at this time, Abu Zubaydah was allowed to briefly 
See, for example, ■■■ 10116 (25073 1 Z APR 02). 

10047 (161406Z APR 02) 

10058 (171904Z APR 02) 

1.6 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS 
#2 010-2939). 

1.7 ■■■ 10058 (171904Z APR 02) 

118 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III for additional information. 

119 I 



10090 (210703Z APR 02). As described in more detail in Volume II, Abu Zubaydah did provide 
ku nyas for the pair. 

120 ■■■ 10063 (180515Z APR 02). As described in detail in Volume II and Volume III, as well as more 
briefly in this summary, Abu Zubaydah pr ovided this inform ation aft er being all owed to sleep. 

TOP 

Page 29 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET// 



^/NOFOR N 



the thwarting of the “Dirty Bomb Plot” and the capture of Jose Padilla. 121 However, the chief of 
the Abu Zubaydah Task Force stated that “AZ’s info alone would never have allowed us to find 
them,” while another CIA officer stated that the CIA was already “alert” to the threat posed by 
Jose Padilla, and that the CIA’s “suspicion” was only “enhanced during the debriefings of Abu 
Zubaydah.” 122 Additional information on the “Dirty Bomb Plot” and the capture of Jose Padilla 
is provided later in this summary. 

During the month of April 2002, which included a period during 
which Abu Zubaydah was hospitalized, on life support, and unable to speak, the CIA 
disseminated 39 intelligence reports based on his interrogations. 123 At the end of April 2002, the 
DETENTION SITE GREEN interrogation team provided CIA Headquarters with three 
interrogation strategies. CIA Headquarters chose the most coercive interrogation option, which 
was proposed and supported by CIA contractor SWIGERT. 124 This coercive interrogation 
option — which included sensory deprivation — was again opposed by the FBI special agents at 
the detention site. 125 The interrogation proposal was to engage in “only a single-minded, 
consistent, totally focused questioning of current threat information.” 126 Once implemented, this 
approach failed to produce the information CIA Headquarters believed Abu Zubaydah 
possessed: threats to the United States and information about al-Qa’ida operatives located in the 
United States. Nonetheless, Abu Zubaydah continued to provide other intelligence. In May 
2002, the CIA disseminated 56 intelligence reports based on the interrogations. 127 

In early June 2002, the CIA interrogation team recommended that 
Abu Zubaydah spend several weeks in isolation while the interrogation team members departed 
the facility “as a means of keeping [Abu Zubaydah] off-balance and to allow the team needed 
time off for a break and to at tend to pe rsonal matters as well as to discuss “the 

endgame” of Abu Zubaydah HH with officers from CIA Headquarters. 128 As a result, from 
June 18, 2002, through August 4, 2002, Abu Zubaydah spent 47 days in isolation without being 



121 See information in this summary and Volume II for additional details on the CIA’s representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced inter rog ation techniques to p olicy makers and the Department of Justice. 

122 CIA email from: BNMHNT' 

01:18:50 PM. The email states: 



|; subject: AZ information; date: Jul y 10, 2002, at 
‘The only way we put this together is that Paki liaison mentioned to f 



the arrest of two individuals (one being an American) and | 



put two and two together. Therefore, AZ’s 



info alone would never have allowed us to find them.” See also SSCI Transcript “Detention of Jose Padilla,” dated 
June 12, 2002 (DTS #2002-2603), in which a CIA officer states, “the Pakistani liaison felt it was important to bring 
[Padilla] to our attention, given the recent raids.. .there was enough information indicating that his travel was 
suspicious, to put us on alert. This suspicion was enhanced during the debriefings of Abu Zubaydah, which 
occurred on 21 April.” 

’ 2 ^ee analysis provided to the Committee on April 18, 201 1, by the CIA, based on CIA searches in 201 1 of the 
IHdatabase. The titles of specific intelligence reports resulting from information provided by Abu Zubaydah are 
listed in the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume 111. 



124 



ALEC 



MAY 02) 



125 See email exchange from: [REDACTED]; to [REDACTED]; with multiple ccs; subject: Turning Up the Heat in 
the AZ Interrogations; date: April 30, 2002, at 12:02:47 PM. 

126 See email exchange from: [REDACTED]; to [REDACTED]; with multiple ccs; subject: Turning Up the Heat in 
the AZ Interrogations; date: April 30, 2002, at 12:02:47 PM. 

127 Se e analysis provided to the Committee on April 18, 2011, by the CIA, based on CIA searches in 201 1 of the 
| database. The titles of specific intelligence reports resulting from information provided by Abu Zubaydah are 



listed in the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III. 



128 



10424 (0708 14Z JUN 02) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 30 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET 



//NOF O RN 



asked any questions. Despite the fact that Abu Zubaydah was in isolation for nearly half of the 
month, the CIA disseminated 37 intelligence reports based on the interrogations of Abu 
Zubaydah in June 2002. 129 The CIA would later represent publicly — as well as in classified 
settings — that during the use of “established US Government interrogation techniques,” Abu 
Zubaydah “stopped all cooperation” in June 2002, requiring the development of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 130 CIA records do not support this assertion. 

Prior to Abu Zubaydah’ s 47-day isolation period, Abu Zubaydah 
provided information on al-Qa’ida activities, plans, capabilities, and relationships, in addition to 
information on its leadership structure, including personalities, decision-making processes, 
training, and tactics. 131 As described in more detail in the full Committee Study, Abu 
Zubaydah’ s inability to provide information on the next attack in the United States and 
operatives in the United States served as the basis for CIA representations that Abu Zubaydah 
was “uncooperative,” as well as for the CIA’s determination that Abu Zubaydah required the use 
of what would later be known as the CIA’s “enhanced interrogation techniques” to become 
“compliant” and reveal the information the CIA believed he was withholding. Abu Zubaydah 
never provided this information, and CIA officers later concluded this was information Abu 
Zubaydah did not possess. 132 

After Abu Zubayd ah was placed in isolation, the Abu Zubaydah 
mli uni ilimili iiii B^B^^BBBBBBB [departed Country |]. Security and medical 
personnel remained at the detention site. The FBI special agents did not return to DETENTION 
SITE GREEN. 133 

7. Proposal by CIA Contract Personnel to Use SERE-Based Interrogation Techniques 
Leads to the Development of the CIA 's Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; The CIA 
Determines that “ the Interrogation Process Takes Precedence Over Preventative 
Medical Procedures ” 



129 Se e analysis provided to the Committee on April 18, 2011 , by the CIA, based on CIA searches in 201 1 of the 
B| database. The titles of specific intelligence reports resulting from information provided by Abu Zubaydah are 
listed in the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III of the Committee Study. 

130 See Presidential Speech on September 6, 2006, based on CIA information and vetted by CIA personnel. See also 
ODNI September 2006 Unclassified Public Release: “During initial interrogation, Abu Zubaydah gave some 
information that he probably viewed as nominal. Some was important, however, including that Khalid Shaykh 
Mohammad (KSM) was the 9/1 1 mastermind and used the moniker ‘Mukhtar.’ This identification allowed us to 
comb previously collected intelligence for both names, opening up new leads to this terrorist plotter — leads that 
eventually resulted in his capture. It was clear to his interrogators that Abu Zubaydah possessed a great deal of 
information about al-Qa’ida; however, he soon stopped all cooperation. Over the ensuing months, the CIA designed 
a new interrogation program that would be safe, effective, and legal.” See also CIA Director Michael Hayden, 
Classified Statement for the Record, Hearing on the Central Intelligence Agency Detention and Interrogation 
Program, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-1563) (“...FBI and CIA continued unsuccessfully to try to glean information 
from Abu Zubaydah using established US Government interrogation techniques....”). 

131 See reporting charts in Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III, as well as CIA paper entitled “Abu 
Zubaydah,” dated March 2005. The same information is included in an “Abu Zubaydah Bio” document “Prepared 
on 9 August 2006.” 

132 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III for additional details. 

133 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume HI for additional details. 

Page 31 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



/ / NOFQRN 



In early July 2002, CIA officers held several meetings at CIA 
Headquarters to discuss the possible use of “novel interrogation methods” on Abu Zubaydah. 134 
During the course of those meetings SWIGERT proposed using techniques derived from the U.S. 
military’s SERE (Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape) school. 135 SWIGERT provided a 
list of 12 SERE techniques for possible use by the CIA: (1) the attention grasp, (2) walling, (3) 
facial hold, (4) facial slap, (5) cramped confinement, (6) wall standing, (7) stress positions, (8) 
sleep deprivation, (9) waterboard, (10) use of diapers, (11) use of insects, and (12) mock 
burial. 136 SWIGERT also recommended that the CIA enter into a contract with Hammond 
DUNBAR, his co-author of the CIA report on potential al-Qa’ida interrogation resistance 
training, to aid in the CIA interrogation process. 137 Like SWIGERT, DUNBAR had never 
participated in a real-world interrogation. His interrogation experience was limited to the paper 
he authored with SWIGERT and his work with U.S. Air Force personnel at the SERE school. 138 



134 See CIA document dated, July 3, 2002, 1630 Hours, titled, “CIA Operational Update Memorandu m for CIA 
Leadership, SENSITIVE ADDENDUM: Update on the Abu Zubaydah Operation and |m|[ Raid HH ” 

135 For more information on the SERE program, see the Senate Armed Services Committee Inquiry into the 
Treatment of Detainees in U.S. Custody, December 2008. See also statement of Senator Carl Levin on the inquiry, 
December 1 1 , 2008: “SERE training is intended to be used to teach our soldiers how to resist interrogation by 
enemies that refuse to follow the Geneva Conventions and international law. In SERE school, our troops who are at 
risk of capture are exposed in a controlled environment with great protections and caution - to techniques adapted 
from abusive tactics used against American soldiers by enemies such as the Communist Chinese during the Korean 
War. SERE training techniques include stress positions, forced nudity, use of fear, sleep deprivation and, until 
recently, the Navy SERE school used the waterboard. These techniques were designed to give our students a taste 
of what they might be subjected to if captured by a ruthless, lawless enemy so that they would be better prepared to 
resist. The techniques were never intended to be used against detainees in U.S. custody. As one [Joint Personnel 
Recovery Agency (JPRA)] instructor explained, SERE training is based on illegal exploitation (under the rules listed 
in the 1949 GenevaConvention Rel ative to the Treatmen t of Prisoners of War) of prisoners over the last 50 years.” 

136 Email from: to: subject: Description of Physical Pressures; date: July 8, 

2002, at 0 4:15:15 PM. 

137 ALEC ■■ (051724Z JUL 02) 

138 See Resume, Hammond DUNBAR, submitted to the CLA in March 2003. In a section on “Interrogation and 
Debriefing Experience,” DUNBAR’s 2003 resume noted that he had been a “debriefer for all USG DOD and 
Civilian 




All other experience in the section related to his 
interrogation experience as a contractor for the CI^beginningin2002. DUNBAR’s resume did state that he had 
participated in an interrogation training course in * n 1992, and that he had taken a one-week 

Defense Interrogation Course at some point in 2002, although his resume does not indicate whether this was prior to, 
or after, the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the Committee Study was 
“incorrect... in asserting that the contractors selected had no relevant experience.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response 
notes SWIGERT and DUNBAR’s experience at the Department of Defense SERE school, and SWIGERT’s 
“academic research” and “research papers” on “such topics as resistance training, captivity familiarization, and 
learned helplessness - all of which were relevant to the development of the program.” The CIA’s June 2013 
Response does not describe any experience related to actual interrogations or counterterrorism, or any relevant 
cultural, geographic, or linguistic expertise. The CIA’s June 2013 Response provides the following explanation: 
“Drs. [SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR] had the closest proximate expertise CIA sought at the beginning of the program, 
specifically in the area of non-standard means of interrogation. Experts on traditional interrogation methods did not 
meet this requirement. Non-standard interrogation methodologies were not an area of expertise of CIA officers or of 
the US Government generally. We believe their expertise was so unique that we would have been derelict had we 
not sought them out when it became clear that CIA would be heading into the uncharted territory of the program” 
(italics and emphasis in original). As noted above, the CIA did not seek out SWIGERT and DUNBAR after a 
decision was made to use coercive interrogation techniques; rather, SWIGERT and DUNBAR played a role in 
convincing the CIA to adopt such a policy. 

i m m iii i mi mm 

Page 32 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



In May 2003, a senior CIA interrogator would tell personnel from 
the CIA’s Office of Inspector General that SWIGERT and DUNBAR’s SERE school model was 
based on resisting North Vietnamese “physical torture” and was designed to extract “confessions 
for propaganda purposes” from U.S. airmen “who possessed little actionable intelligence.” The 
CIA, he believed, “need[ed] a different working model for interrogating terrorists where 
confessions are not the ultimate goal.” 139 

) After the July 2002 meetings, the CIA’s |^^|CTC Legal, 

, drafted a letter to Attorney General John Ashcroft asking the Department of 
Justice for “a formal declination of prosecution, in advance, for any employees of the United 
States, as well as any other personnel acting on behalf of the United States, who may employ 
methods in the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah that otherwise might subject those individuals to 
prosecution.” 140 The letter further indicated that “the interrogation team had concluded” that 
“the use of more aggressive methods is required to persuade Abu Zubaydah to provide the 
critical information we need to safeguard the lives of innumerable innocent men, women and 
children within the United States and abroad.” The letter added that these “aggressive methods” 
would otherwise be prohibited by the torture statute, “apart from potential reliance upon the 
doctrines of necessity or of self-defense.” 141 This letter was circulated internally at the CIA, 
including to SWIGERT; however, there are no records to indicate it was provided to the attorney 
general. 142 

) On July 13, 2002, ^^^^|^TC Legal, 
and the CIA’s acting general counsel, John Rizzo, met with attorneys from the National Security 
Council and the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel (OLC), as well as with Michael 
Chertoff, the head of the Department of Justice Criminal Division, and Daniel Levin, the chief of 
staff to the FBI director, to provide an overview of the CIA’s proposed interrogation techniques 
and to ask for a formal, definitive DOJ opinion regarding the lawfulness of employing the 
specific CIA interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah. 143 

The CIA attorneys described the 12 proposed interrogation 
techniques and told the Department of Justice and National Security Council attorneys that Abu 
Zubaydah continued to withhold critical intelligence on the identities of al-Qa’ida personnel in 
the United States and planned al-Qa’ida attacks. The CIA attorneys also told the group that CIA 
officers were complemented by: 

“expert personnel retained on contract who possess extensive experience, 
gained within the Department of Defense, on the psychological and physical 



139 Interview of^|^H[||, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, October 

22, 2003. The senior interrogator had participated in the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques with 
SWIGERT and DUNBAR. 

140 Email from: to: subject: EYES ONLY- DRAFT; date: July 8, 2002. 

141 Email from: to: subject: EYES ONLY- DRAFT; date: July 8, 2002. 

142 Email from: to: HHHB subject: EYES ONLY- DRAFT; date: July 8, 2002. 

143 DIRECTOR^^B(031357ZAUG 02) 



Page 33 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



methods of interrogation and the resistance techniques employed as 
countermeasures to such interrogation.” 144 

(TS//^|^^|^^^|^/NF) According to the CIA cable describing the meeting, the 
representatives from the OLC, including Deputy Assistant Attorney General John Yoo, advised 
that the criminal prohibition on torture would not prohibit the methods proposed by the 
interrogation team because of the absence of any specific intent to inflict severe physical or 
mental pain or suffering. 145 On July 13, 2002, Yoo sent an unclassified letter to the CIA’s acting 
general counsel describing his interpretation of the statute. 146 

Despite the initial view expressed by Yoo that the use of the 
proposed CIA interrogation techniques would be lawful, on July 17, 2002, National Security 
Advisor Condoleezza Rice requested a delay in the approval of the interrogation techniques for 
Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation until the attorney general issued an opinion. 147 The following 
day, Rice and Deputy National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley requested that the Department 
of Justice “delay the approval of the memo detailing the next phase of interrogations” until the 
CIA provided specific details on its proposed interrogation techniques and “an explanation of 
why the CIA is confident these techniques will not cause lasting and irreparable harm to Abu 
Zubaydah.” 148 Rice asked the CIA to provide the OLC with a description of each of the planned 
interrogation techniques, and to “gather and provide any available empirical data on the reactions 
and likelihood of prolonged mental harm from the use of the ‘water board’ and the staged 
burial.” 149 

On July 15, 2002, a cable providing details on the proposed 
interrogation phase stated that only the DETENTION SITE GREEN chief of Base would be 
allowed to interrupt or stop an interrogation in process, and that the chief of Base would be the 
final decision-making authority as to whether the CIA’s interrogation techniques applied to Abu 
Zubaydah would be discontinued. 150 The CIA officers at the detention site added: 

“If [Abu Zubaydah] develops a serious medical condition which may involve a 
host of conditions including a heart attack or another catastrophic type of 
condition, all efforts will be made to ensure that proper medical care will be 
provided to [him]. In the event [Abu Zubaydah] dies, we need to be prepared 
to act accordingly, keeping in mind the liaison equities involving our hosts.” 151 



144 DIRECTOR ■■ (031357Z AUG 02) 

145 DIRECTOR (031357Z AUG 02) 

146 July 13, 2002, Letter from John Yoo, Deputy Assistant Attorney General to John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, 
CIA. 



147 Memorandum for the Record from John H. Moseman, Chief of Staff, re: NSC Weekly Meeting, July 17, 2002. 

148 July 19, 2002, 1630 Hours, CIA Operational Update Memorandum for CIA Leadership, SENSITIVE 

ADDENDUM: Update on the Abu Zubaydah Operation and Raid 

149 July 21, 2002, 1630 Hours, CIA Operational Update Memorandum for CIA Leadership, SENSITIVE 



A DDENDUM : Update on the Abu Zubaydah Operation and | 

10536 (151006ZJUL 02) 

10536 (15 1006ZJUL 02) 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 34 of 499 



Raid 



// NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T// 



// NOF Q R N 



(TS/^H[^^HH//NF) To address these issues, the cable stated that if Abu Zubaydah were 
to die during the interrogation, he would be cremated. 152 The interrogation team closed the cable 
by stating: 

“regardless which [disposition] option we follow however, and especially in 
light of the planned psychological pressure techniques to be implemented, we 
need to get reasonable assurances that [Abu Zubaydah] will remain in isolation 
and incommunicado for the remainder of his life.” 153 



Officers from the CIA’s ALEC Station responded to the 
interrogation team’s comments several days later. Their cable noted that the interrogation team 
was correct in its “understanding that the interrogation process takes precedence over 
preventative medical procedures.” 154 ALEC Station further observed: 



“There is a fairly unanimous sentiment within HQS that [Abu Zubaydah] will 
never be placed in a situation where he has any significant contact with others 
and/or has the opportunity to be released. While it is difficult to discuss 
specifics at this point, all major players are in concurrence that [Abu 
Zubaydah] should remain incommunicado for the remainder of his life. This 
may preclude [Abu Zubaydah] from being turned over to another country, but 
a final decision regarding his future incarceration condition has yet to be 
made.” 155 



As a result of the request by National Security Advisor Rice for 
additional research on the CIA’s proposed interrogation techniques, CIA and DOJ personnel 
contacted individuals at the Department of Defense’s Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA), 
the agency that administers the SERE school, to gather infor mation about the eff ects of using the 
techniqu es in training exercises. 156 According to CIA officer who had 

■■Ijoined the CIA’s OTS after d years at JPRA, an individual with SERE school 
experience commented that “information gleaned via harsh treatment may not be accurate, as the 
prisoner may say anything to avoid further pain,” and that “[c]urrent doctrine for interrogations 
conducted in the permanent phase of capture may lean towards ‘soft’ or ‘indirect’ rounds of 
questioning.” 157 

Pursuant to National Security Advisor Rice’s request, CIA 
Headquarters personnel also requested information from the interrogation team — particularly 



10536 (15 1006ZJUL 02) 
10536 (151006ZJUL 02) 
(182321Z JUL 02) 
182321Z JUL 0 2) 

July 24, 2002, fax from 
OTS/OAD psychologists; email from 



154 ALEC 

155 ALEC 

156 Email from: 



[RED ACTED]; subject: Request for JPRA information; date: July 19, 2002; 
to John Yo o an d [REDACTED] pro viding information from the 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



157 Email from: 
Records indicate that 



; subject: Discussio n with JPRA Chief of Staff; date: July 24, 2002. 

; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Request for JPRA information; date: July 19, 2002. 
|’s notes were not provided to the Department of Justice. In November 2002, 

, led die first CIA i nterrogator training course. 

/NOFORN 

Page 35 of 499 



|, along with Chief of Interrogati ons 

T OP SECRET/, 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



SWIGERT and DUNBAR — about the psychological effects of the use of the waterboard and 
mock burial. The chief of Base at DETENTION SITE GREEN responded by cable noting that: 

“We are a nation of laws and we do not wish to parse words. A bottom line in 
considering the new measures proposed is that [Abu Zubaydah] is being held 
in solitary confinement, against his will, without legal representation, as an 
enemy of our country, our society and our people. Therefore, while the 
techniques described in Headquarters meetings and below are administered to 
student volunteers in the U.S. in a harmless way, with no measurable impact 
on the psyche of the volunteer, we do not believe we can assure the same here 
for a man forced through these processes and who will be made to believe this 
is the future course of the remainder of his life. Station, [DETENTION SITE 
GREEN chief of Base] and [DETENTION SITE GREEN] personnel will make 
every effort possible to insure [sic] that subject is not permanently physically 
or mental harmed but we should not say at the outset of this process that there 
is no risk.” 158 



As former psychologists for the United States Air Force, 
SWIGERT and DUNBAR had no direct experience with the waterboard, as it was not used in 
Air Force SERE training. Nonetheless, they indicated that the waterboard — which they 
described as an “absolutely convincing technique” — was necessary to overwhelm Abu 
Zubaydah’ s ability to resist. 159 They also responded that they were aware that the Navy — which 
used the waterboard technique in training — had not reported any significant long-term 
consequences on individuals from its use. Unlike the CIA’s subsequent use of the waterboard, 
however, the Navy’s use of the technique was a single training exercise and did not extend to 
multiple sessions. SWIGERT and DUNBAR wrote: 

“any physical pressure applied to extremes can cause severe mental pain or 
suffering. Hooding, the use of loud music, sleep deprivation, controlling 
darkness and light, slapping, walling, or the use of stress positions taken to 
extreme can have the same outcome. The safety of any technique lies 
primarily in how it is applied and monitored.’ 160 

On July 24, 2002, the attorney general verbally approved the use 
of 10 interrogation techniques, which included: the attention grasp, walling, the facial hold, the 
facial slap (insult slap), cramped confinement, wall standing, stress positions, sleep deprivation, 
use of diapers, and use of insects. 161 The interrogation team, however, indicated that they 
intended to wait for the approval to use the waterboard before proceeding with their 
interrogation of Abu Zubaydah. On July 26, 2002, the attorney general verbally approved the 



158 [REDACTE D] 73208 (231043Z JUL 02) 

159 BM 10568 (261 101Z JUL 02) 

160 [REDACTE D] 7320 8 (231043Z JUL 02) 

161 DIRECTOR ■■ (251609Z AUG 02 

TOP SECRET// 




VN OFORN 



Page 36 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



use of the waterboard. 162 The OLC finalized its classified written legal opinion on August 1, 
2002. The earlier CIA request to conduct a mock burial was not formally considered by the 
OLC. The approved interrogation techniques, along with other CIA interrogation techniques 
that were subsequently identified and used by the CIA, are referred to as the CIA’s “enhanced 
interrogation techniques,” or more commonly by the CIA as “EITs.” 

In the course of seeking approval to use the techniques, CIA 
Headquarters advised the Department of Justice and the national security advisor that “countless 
more Americans may die unless we can persuade AZ to tell us what he knows.” CLA 
Headquarters further represented that the DETENTION SITE GREEN interrogation team 
believed “Abu Zubaydah continues to withhold critical threat information,” and “that in order to 
persuade him to provide” that information, “the use of more aggressive techniques is 
required.” 163 The cable to DETENTION SITE GREEN from CIA Headquarters documenting 
the information CIA Headquarters had provided to the Department of Justice warned that “[t]he 
legal conclusions are predicated upon the determinations by the interrogation team that Abu 
Zubaydah continues to withhold critical threat information.” 164 According to cables, however, 
the CIA interrogators at the detention site had not determined that “the use of more aggressive 
techniques was required” to “persuade” Abu Zubaydah to provide threat information. Rather, 
the interrogation team believed the objective of the coercive interrogation techniques was to 
confirm Abu Zubaydah did not have additional information on threats to the United States, 
writing: 



“Our assumption is the objective of this operation is to achieve a high degree 
of confidence that [Abu Zubaydah] is not holding back actionable information 
concerning threats to the United States beyond that which [Abu Zubaydah] has 
already provided.” 165 



As is described in this summary, and in more detail in the full 
Committee Study, the interrogation team later deemed the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques a success, not because it resulted in critical threat information, but 
because it provided further evidence that Abu Zubaydah had not been withholding the 
aforementioned information from the interrogators. 166 

8. The CIA Obtains Legal and Policy Approval for Its Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; 

The CIA Does Not Brief the President 



162 Email from: 



; to: Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], 
subject: EYES ONLY - Where we stand re: Abu Zubaydah; date: July 26, 2002. See also \ 
(261101Z JUL 02) 

(031357Z AUG 02) 

(031357Z AUG 02) 



163 DIRECTOR 

164 DIRECTOR 






[RED ACTED]; 
10568 



165 [REDACTED] 73208 (231043Z JUL 02) and email from: 



to: [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], and | 



|; subject: Addendum from [DETENTION SITE GREEN], [REDACTED] 



73208 (231043Z JUL 02); date: July 23, 2002, at 07:56:49 PM. 



10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



Page 37 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



(TS/^HUplF) As described, CIA officers represented to National Security 
Advisor Rice that Abu Zubaydah was withholding information on pending attacks and operatives 
in the United States. On July 31, 2002, Rice informed Deputy DCI John McLaughlin that, in 
balancing the application of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against the possible 
loss of American lives, she would not object to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques if 
the attorney general determined them to be legal. 167 

During the month of July 2002, the CIA anticipated that the 
president would need to approve the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques before 
they could be used. Therefore, in late July 2002, the CIA prepared talking points for a briefing 
of the president. These draft talking points indicated that the CIA was planning to use 
inteiTogation techniques beyond what was normally permitted by law enforcement, and included 
a brief description of the waterboard interrogation technique. On August 1, 2002, based on 
comments from White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, the talking points were revised to 
eliminate references to the waterboard. 168 CIA records indicate, however, that the talking points 
were not used to brief the president. On August 2, 2002, the National Security Council legal 
advisor informed the DCI’s chief of staff that “Dr. Rice had been informed that there would be 
no briefing of the President on this matter,” 169 but that the DCI had policy approval to employ 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 170 

CIA records state that prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques on Abu Zubaydah in 2002, the CIA did not brief Secretary of State 
Colin Powell or Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, two members of the National Security 
Council, on the techniques. 171 The Committee, including the chairman and vice chairman, was 
also not briefed on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques prior to their use. 172 

Approximately a year later, on July 31, 2003, senior CIA personnel 
believed the president had still not been briefed on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 173 In August 2003, DCI Tenet told the CIA Office of Inspector General that “he had 
never spoken to the President regarding the detention and interrogation program or EITs, nor was 



167 Memorandum for the Record from John Moseman, Chief of Staff, re: NSC Weekly Meeting, July 31, 2002. 

168 July 26, 2001, DCI Talking Points with the President- Next Phase of the Abu Zubaydah Interrogation; July 31, 
2001, DCI Talking Points with the President- Next Phase of the Abu Zubaydah Interrogation. Note that the draft 
document lists the incorrect year. 

169 CIA records do not indicate who informed National Security Advisor Rice “that there would be no briefing of the 
President on this matter.” 

170 Email from: John Moseman; to: John McLaughlin, Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], John Rizzo, [REDACTED]; 
subject: Abu-Z Interrogation; date: August 2, 2002. 



,7> Email from: John Rizzo; to: subject: Rump PC on interrogations; date: July 31, 2003. 

172 See Volume II for additional information on congressional briefings. 

173 An email from CIA Senior Deputy General Counsel John Rizzo stated that “the President will be briefed as part 
of the regular annual [covert action] review. Briefing (by Rice or VP or Counsel to the President or some 
combination thereof) will describe the interrogation program, the fact that some aggressive but AG-approved 
techniques have been used, but will not apparently get into the details of the techniques themselves.” See email 



from: John Rizzo; to: 



; subj ect: Rump PC on interrogations; date: July 31, 2003. 

TOP 

Page 38 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET - // 



//NOF O RN 



he aware of whether the President had been briefed by his staff.” 174 The May 2004 CIA 
Inspector General Special Review included a recommendation for the DCI to: 

“Brief the President regarding the implementation of the Agency’s detention 
and interrogation activities pursuant to the MON of 17 September 2001 or any 
other authorities, including the use of EITs and the fact that detainees have 
died. This Recommendation is significant.” 175 

In transmitting the Special Review to the Committee, DCI Tenet 
responded to the recommendation, noting only that “[t]he DCI will determine whether and to 
what extent the President requires a briefing on the Program.” 176 On April 6, 2006, CIA 
Inspector General Helgerson responded to a request from Committee Vice Chairman John D. 
Rockefeller IV on the status of corrective actions taken in response to the Special Review 
recommendations. With regard to a briefing for the president, Helgerson wrote: “Consistent 
with this recommendation, DCI Tenet, before he left office, and Director Goss, shortly after 
taking office, both advised me that they had made requests to brief the President.” 177 Prepared 
“Questions and Answers” for the National Security Council principals in connection with the 
disclosure of the program in September 2006 and subsequent media outreach also suggest that 
the president was not briefed at the outset about the CIA’s interrogation techniques. In response 
to the potential question: “What role did the President play. . .Was he briefed on the interrogation 
techniques, and if so when?” the proposed answer did not assert that the president was briefed, 
but rather that the “President was not of course involved in CIA’s day to day operations - 
including who should be held by CIA and how they should be questioned - these decisions are 
made or overseen by CIA Directors.” 178 



174 Office of General Counsel Comments on Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program Special Review, 
at 23 (“[i]n August 2003, the DCI advised OIG...”); CIA Office of Inspector General, Interview of George Tenet, 
memorandum dated 8 September 2003, Subject: 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogation for Counterterrrorism 
Purposes. 

175 Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Acti vities (September 2001- 
October 2003), May 7, 2004 (DTS #2004-2710). 

176 Letter from George J. Tenet to Chairman Pat Roberts, June 22, 2004 (DTS #2004-2710). 

177 Helgerson then added, “Additionally, public disclosure of many of these activities ensured wide awareness. In 
light of these developments, I consider the matter closed.” The Helgerson letter does not indicate to whom Directors 
Tenet and Goss, who met regularly with the President, submitted requests to brief the President about the program. 
See letter from John L. Helgerson to Vice Chairman John D. Rockefeller IV, April 5, 2006 (DTS #2006-1 564). The 
CIA’s June 2013 Response does not dispute these records. It states, however, that “[w]hile Agency records on the 
subject are admittedly incomplete, former President Bush has stated in his autobiography that he discussed the 
program, including the use of enhanced techniques, with DCIA Tenet in 2002, prior to application of the techniques 
on Abu Zubaydah, and personally approved the techniques.” A subsequent memoir by former CIA Acting General 
Counsel John Rizzo (published January 7, 2014) states, “The one senior U.S. Government national security official 
during this time — from August 2002 through 2003 — who I did not believe was knowledgeable about the E.I.T.s was 
President Bush himself. He was not present at any of the Principal Committee meetings . . . and none of the 
principals at any of the E.I.T. sessions during this period ever alluded to the President knowing anything about 
them.” 

178 Included in the packet of CIA information was the following: “Question: ‘What role did the President play in 
authorizing this program? Did he select detainees held by CIA or direct their interrogation? Was he briefed on the 
interrogation techniques, and if so when?’ Answer: ‘In the days after 9/11, the President directed that all the 
instruments of national power, including the resources of our intelligence, military, and law enforcement 
communities, be employed to fight and wi n the war against al Qaeda and its affi liates, within the bounds of the law. 

Page 39 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



CIA records indicate that the first CIA briefing for the president on 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques occurred on April 8, 2006. 179 CIA records state that 
when the president was briefed, he expressed discomfort with the “image of a detainee, chained 
to the ceiling, clothed in a diaper, and forced to go to the bathroom on himself.” 180 

9. The CIA Uses the Waterboard and Other Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Against 
Abu Zubaydah 



(TS/BB^BI^B^^) O n August 3, 2002, CIA Headquarters informed the interrogation 
team at DETENTION SITE GREEN that it had formal approval to apply the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, including the waterboard, against Abu Zubaydah. According to CIA 
records, only the two CIA contractors, SWIGERT and DUNBAR, were to have contact with Abu 
Zubaydah. Other CIA personnel at DETENTION SITE GREEN - including CIA medical 
personnel and other CIA “interrogators with whom he is familiar” - were only to observe. 181 



(TS/^B^^^^B^B^^) F rom August 4, 2002, through August 23, 2002, the CIA subjected 
Abu Zubaydah to its enhanced interrogation techniques on a near 24-hour-per-day basis. After 
Abu Zubaydah had been in complete isolation for 47 days, the most aggressive interrogation 
phase began at approximately 1 1:50 AM on August 4, 2002. 182 Security personnel entered the 
cell, shackled and hooded Abu Zubaydah, and removed his towel (Abu Zubaydah was then 
naked). Without asking any questions, the interrogators placed a rolled towel around his neck as 
a collar, and backed him up into the cell wall (an interrogator later acknowledged the collar was 



This included important, new roles for CIA in detaining and questioning terrorists. [He was periodically updated by 
CIA Directors on significant captures of terrorists, and information obtained that helped stop attacks and led to 
capture of other terrorists.] [The President was not of course involved in CIA’s day to day operations - including 
who should be held by CIA and how they should be questioned - these decisions are made or overseen by CIA 
Directors].”’ See Draft Questions and Proposed Answers, attached to Memorandum from National Security Advisor 
Stephen J. Hadley; for: the Vice President, Secretaries of State and Defense, the Attorney General, Director of 
National Intelligence and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; cc: chief of staff to the President, Counsel to the 
President, Assistant to the President for National Security, White House Spokesman, dated September 2, 2006. 
Brackets in the original. 

179 See April 16, 2008, CIA “Backgrounder: Chronology of Interrogation Approvals, 2001-2003” (noting that “CIA 
documentation and discussions with Presidential briefers and individuals involved with the interrogation program at 
the time suggest that details on enhanced interrogation techniques (EITs) were not shared with the President” in the 
2001-2003 timeframe); CIA Q&A, Topic: Waterboarding (“The information we have indicates the President was not 
briefed by CIA regarding the specific interrogation techniques until April 2006, and at that time DC1A Goss briefed 
him on the seven EITs proposed at that time for the post-Detainee Treatment Act CIA interrogation program.”). As 
described, in the April 2006 briefing the President “expressed discomfort” with the “image of a detainee, chained to 
the ceiling, clothed in a diaper, and forced to go to the bathroom on himself.” See email from: Grayson SWIGERT; 



to: [REDACTED]; cc: 



> subject: Dr. SWIGERT^^un^neeting with DCI; date: June 7, 2006. 

~BB; subject: Dr. SWIGERT’ s 7 June 



180 Email from: Grayson SWIGERT; to: [REDACTED]; cc 
meeting with DCI; date: June 7, 2006 

181 Increased Pressure in the Next Phase of the Abu Zubaydah Interrogations, Attachment to email from: 



[REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; cc: 



|, [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], 



[REDACTED]; subject: Increased Pressure Phase - for DCI Sensitive Addendum; date: July 10, 2002. 



10586 (041559Z AUG 02) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 40 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET // 



//N O FOR N 



used to slam Abu Zubaydah against a concrete wall). 183 The interrogators then removed the 
hood, performed an attention grab, and had Abu Zubaydah watch while a large confinement box 
was brought into the cell and laid on the floor. 184 A cable states Abu Zubaydah “was unhooded 
and the large confinement box was carried into the interrogation room and paced [sic] on the 
floor so as to appear as a coffin.” 185 The interrogators then demanded detailed and verifiable 
information on terrorist operations planned against the United States, including the names, phone 
numbers, email addresses, weapon caches, and safe houses of anyone involved. CIA records 
describe Abu Zubaydah as appearing apprehensive. Each time Abu Zubaydah denied having 
additional information, the interrogators would perform a facial slap or face grab. 186 At 
approximately 6:20 PM, Abu Zubaydah was waterboarded for the first time. Over a two-and-a- 
half-hour period, Abu Zubaydah coughed, vomited, and had “involuntary spasms of the torso and 
extremities” during waterboarding. 187 Detention site personnel noted that “throughout the 
process [Abu Zubaydah] was asked and given the opportunity to respond to questions about 
threats” to the United States, but Abu Zubaydah continued to maintain that he did not have any 
additional information to provide. 188 In an email to OMS leadership entitled, “So it begins,” a 
medical officer wrote: 



“The sessions accelerated rapidly progressing quickly to the water board after 
large box, walling, and small box periods. [Abu Zubaydah] seems very 
resistant to the water board. Longest time with the cloth over his face so far 
has been 17 seconds. This is sure to increase shortly. NO useful information 




See email from: [REDACTED]; to: 



mim; subject: Subject detainee allegation - per our telcon of 
today; date: March 28, 2007, at 04:42 PM, which states Abu Zubaydah claims “a collar was used to slam him 
against a concrete wall. While we do not have a record that this occurred, one interrogator at the site at the time 
confirmed that this did indeed happen. For the record, a plywood ‘wall’ was immediately constructed at the site 
aft er the wallin g on the concrete wall.” 

10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

10586 (041559Z AUG 02) 

10586 (041559Z AUG 02); ■■■ 10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

10586 (041559Z AUG 02). CIA contractor DUNBAR later told the CIA OIG that “[t]heir 
instructions from [chief of Base] were to focus on only one issue, that is, Zubaydah’s knowledge of plans to attack 
die U.S.” According to the OIG’s record of the interview, “[DUNBAR] and [SWIGERT] could ask that question in 
a number of ways, but it was the only theme they were authorized by [chief of Base] to use with [Abu] Zubaydah.” 
(See February 10, 2003, interview report of Hammond DUNBAR, Office of the Inspector General.) The acting 
chief of Station in Country |, in an interview with the CIA OIG, stated that “there were days at [DETENTION 
SITE GREEN] when the team had no requirements from Headquarters,” and that CTC did not give the chief of Base 
(COB) the “flexibility as CO B to ask other questions ” besides those related to threats to the United States. ( See May 
28, 2003, interview report of Office of die Inspector General.) The chief of Support 

Services at the CIA Station stated that “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR] were frustrated that they kept beating 
Zubaydah up on th e same question while g etting the same physiologic response from him.” (See May 21, 2003, 

”1 Office of the Inspector General.) Other interviewees described how 
analytical assumptions about Abu Zubaydah drove the interrogation process. (See May 22, 2003, interview report of 
|, Office of the Inspector General; and February 27, 2003, interview report of Hd 
|, Office of the Inspector General.) Chief of CTC, Jose Rodriguez, told the OIG that “CTC subject 
matter experts” pointed to intelligence that they said indicated that Abu Zubaydah knew more than he was admitting 
and thus disagreed with the assessment from DETENTION SITE GREEN that Abu Zubaydah was “compliant.” 
According to the OIG’s record of die Jose Rodriguez interview, “disagreement between the analysts and 
interrogators can be healthy, but in this case Rodriguez believes that the analysts were wrong.” (See interview of 
Jose Rodriguez, Office of die Inspector Ge neral, March 6, 2003.) 

TOP SECRE T//^BBBM|[[^^MM//NOFORN 

Page 41 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



so far. . ..He did vomit a couple of times during the water board with some 
beans and rice. It’s been 10 hours since he ate so this is surprising and 
disturbing. We plan to only feed Ensure for a while now. I’m head[ing] back 
for another water board session.” 189 



The use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — 
including “walling, attention grasps, slapping, facial hold, stress positions, cramped confinement, 
white noise and sleep deprivation” — continued in “varying combinations, 24 hours a day” for 17 
straight days, through August 20, 2002. 190 When Abu Zubaydah was left alone during this 
period, he was placed in a stress position, left on the waterboard with a cloth over his face, or 
locked in one of two confinement boxes. According to the cables, Abu Zubaydah was also 
subjected to the waterboard “2-4 times a day... with multiple iterations of the watering cycle 
during each application.” 191 

The “aggressive phase of interrogation” continued until August 23, 
2002. 192 Over the course of the entire 20 day “aggressive phase of interrogation,” Abu Zubaydah 
spent a total of 266 hours (11 days, 2 hours) in the large (coffin size) confinement box and 29 
hours in a small confinement box, which had a width of 21 inches, a depth of 2.5 feet, and a 
height of 2.5 feet. The CIA interrogators told Abu Zubaydah that the only way he would leave 
the facility was in the coffin-shaped confinement box. 193 

According to the daily cables from DETENTION SITE GREEN, 
Abu Zubaydah frequently “cried,” “begged,” “pleaded,” and “whimpered,” but continued to 
deny that he had any additional information on current threats to, or operatives in, the United 
States. 194 



By August 9, 2002, the sixth day of the interrogation period, the 
interrogation team informed CIA Headquarters that they had come to the “collective preliminary 
assessment” that it was unlikely Abu Zubaydah “had actionable new information about current 
threats to the United States.” 195 On August 10, 2002, the interrogation team stated that it was 
“highly unlikely” that Abu Zubaydah possessed the information they were seeking. 196 On the 
same day, the interrogation team reiterated a request for personnel from CIA Headquarters to 



189 Emphasis in the original. Email from: [REDACTED]; to: and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: So 

it begins; date: August 4, 2002, at 09:45:09AM. CIA Director Hayden informed the Committee in 2007 that “in the 
section [of the ICRC report] on medical care, the report omits key contextual facts. For example, Abu Zubaydah’ s 



statement that he was given only Ensure and water for two to three weeks fails to mention the fact that he was on a 
e appropriate because he was recovering from abdominal surgery at the time.” 

10644 (201235Z AUG 02). For the first 17 days, the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were 
used against Abu Zubaydah in “varying combinations, 24 hours a day.” The “aggressive phase,” as defined by the 
CIA, continued for an additional three days. The CIA continued to use its enhanced interrogation techniques against 




Abi^ubaydah until August 30, 2002. 

191 10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

192 10667 (23 1206Z AUG 02); 

193 10615 (120619Z AUG 02) 

194 10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

195 ^^Hl0604 (091624Z AUG 02) 

196 HHH 1 0607 (100335Z AUG 02) 

T OP SECRET// 



10672 (240229Z AUG 02) 



//NOFORN 



Page 42 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -R E G RET // 



//NOE O R N 



travel to the detention site to view the interrogations. A cable stated that the team believed that a 
“first-hand, on-the-ground look is best,” but if CIA Headquarters personnel could not visit, a 
video teleconference would suffice. 197 DETENTION SITE GREEN personnel also informed 
CIA Headquarters that it was their assessment that the application of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques was “approach [ing] the legal limit.” 198 The chief of CTC, Jose 
Rodriguez, responded: 

“Strongly urge that any speculative language as to the legality of given 
activities or, more precisely, judgment calls as to their legality vis-a-vis 
operational guidelines for this activity agreed upon and vetted at the most 
senior levels of the agency, be refrained from in written traffic (email or cable 
traffic). Such language is not helpful.” 199 

(TS//^H^^^||//NE) DETENTION SITE GREEN cables describe Abu Zubaydah as 
“compliant,” informing CIA Headquarters that when the interrogator “raised his eyebrow, 
without instructions,” Abu Zubaydah “slowly walked on his own to the water table and sat 
down.” 200 When the interrogator “snapped his fingers twice,” Abu Zubaydah would lie flat on 
the waterboard. 201 Despite the assessment of personnel at the detention site that Abu Zubaydah 
was compliant, CIA Headquarters stated that they continued to believe that Abu Zubaydah was 
withholding threat information and instructed the CIA interrogators to continue using the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 202 

(TR//^^^miB/^E) At times Abu Zubaydah was described as “hysterical” 203 and 
“distressed to the level that he was unable to effectively communicate.” 204 Waterboarding 
sessions “resulted in immediate fluid intake and involuntary leg, chest and arm spasms” and 
“hysterical pleas.” 205 In at least one waterboarding session, Abu Zubaydah “became completely 



10607 (100335Z AUG 02). On August 2002, a video-conference between DETENTION SITE 
GREEN and CIA Headquarters occurred, which included an interrogation video described by the interrogation team 
as “quite graphic” and possibly “disturbing to some viewers.” After the video-conference, CIA Headquarters 
instructed DETENTION SITE GREEN to continue the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against 
Abu Zubaydah, but agreed to send two CIA Headquarters officers to the detention site to observe the interrogations 



first-hand. On August 2002, a team from CIA Headquarters, including | 



:TC Legal 



and Deputy Chief of ALEC Station 



I, visited DETENTION SITE GREEN and observed the use 



days after the arrival of the officers from CIA Headquarters. See 



of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including waterboarding. T he “aggressiv e phas e of interro gation” 
ended 
02); ALEC 
02); and 




10643 



AUG 02); 




AUG 



10667 (231206Z AUG 



AUG 02); ■■ 

10672 (240229Z AUG 02). 

10607 (100335Z AUG 02) 

199 Email from: Jose Rodriguez; to: [REDACTED]; subject: [DETENTION SITE GREEN]; date: August 12, 2002, 
wi th attachment o f earlier email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]. 

10614(1 11 633Z AUG 02) 

10614 (11 1633Z A UG 02) 

See, fo r example, A LECH^H (101728 AUG 02); ALEC | 

AUG 02); and 10700 (280820Z AUG 02). 

10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 



200 



(130034Z AUG 02); ALEC 




10643 (1915 18Z AUG 02) 
10643 (1915 18Z AUG 02) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 43 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



flNOFORN 



unresponsive, with bubbles rising through his open, full mouth.” 206 According to CIA records, 
Abu Zubaydah remained unresponsive until medical intervention, when he regained 
consciousness and expelled “copious amounts of liquid.” This experience with the waterboard 
was referenced in emails, but was not documented or otherwise noted in CIA cables. 207 When 
two CIA Headquarters officers later compared the Abu Zubaydah interrogation videotapes to the 
cable record, neither commented on this session. A review of the catalog of videotapes, 
however, found that recordings of a 21 -hour period, which included two waterboarding sessions, 
were missing. 

CIA personnel at DETENTION SITE GREEN reported being 
disturbed by the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah. 

CIA records include the following reactions and comments by CIA personnel: 

• August 5, 2002: “want to caution [medical officer] that this is almost certainly not a 
place he’s ever been before in his medical career... It is visually and psychologically 
very uncomfortable.” 209 

• August 8, 2002: “Today’s first session. . .had a profound effect on all staff members 
present. . .it seems the collective opinion that we should not go much 

further. . .everyone seems strong for now but if the group has to continue. . .we cannot 
guarantee how much longer.” 210 

• August 8, 2002: “Several on the team profoundly affected. . .some to the point of 
tears and choking up.” 211 



206 The description of the episode stated that “on being righted, he failed to respond until the interrogators gave him 
a xyphoid thrust (with our medical folks edging toward the room).” This passage was included in multiple emails, 



to include emails from the 



OMS, 



See email from: 



|; to: [DETENTION 



SITE BLUE ] and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Departure; date: March 6, 2003, at 7:11:59 PM; email from: 

OMS; to: [REDACTED] and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Acceptable lower ambient temperatures; 



date: March 7, 2003, at 8:22 PM; email from: 



|, OMS; to: [REDACTED] and [REDACTED]; 



subject: Re: Talking Points for review and comment; date: August 13, 2004, at 10:22 AM; and email from: 

to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and [REDACTED]; subject: Re- 
Discussion with Dan Levin- AZ; date: October 26, 2004, at 6:09 PM. 



207 Email from: 



|, OMS; to: [REDACTED] and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Acceptable lower 



ambient temperatures; date: March 7, 2003, at 8:22 PM; email from: 



|, OMS; to: [REDACTED] 



and [REDA CTED]; subject: Re: Talking Points for review and comment; date: August 13, 2004, at 10:22 AM; 
email from: 



|; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Discussions with Dan Levin - AZ; date: October 26, 2004, at 6:09 PM. 

208 CIA Inspector General’s Special Review on Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities issued on 



May 7 , 2004. 

209 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

2002, at 05:35AM. 

2,0 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], 
August 8, 2002, at 06:50 AM. 

211 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], 
August 8, 2002, at 06:50 AM. 



| and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Monday; date: August 5, 
an( l [REDACTED]; subject: Update; date: 
an d [REDACTED]; subject: Update; date: 

/ /NOFORN 



Page 44 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



• August 9, 2002: “two, perhaps three [personnel] likely to elect transfer” away from 
the detention site if the decision is made to continue with the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 212 

• August 11, 2002: Viewing the pressures on Abu Zubaydah on video “has produced 
strong feelings of futility (and legality) of escalating or even maintaining the 
pressure.” Per viewing the tapes, “prepare for something not seen previously.” 213 

(TSAHH After the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
ended, CIA personnel at the detention site concluded that Abu Zubaydah had been truthful and 
that he did not possess any new terrorist threat information. 214 

As noted, CIA records indicate that Abu Zubaydah never provided 
the information for which the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were justified and 
approved: information on the next terrorist attack and operatives in the United States. 
Furthermore, as compared to the period prior to August 2002, the quantity and type of 
intelligence produced by Abu Zubaydah remained largely unchanged during and after the August 
2002 use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 215 Nonetheless, CIA Headquarters 
informed the National Security Council that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques used 
against Abu Zubaydah were effective and were “producing meaningful results.” 216 A cable from 



and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: 9 August Update; date: 
and [REDACTED]; subject: Greetings; date: August 11, 2002, 



212 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
August 9, 2002, at 10:44:16 PM. 

213 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
at 09:45 AM. 

214 See, for example, ^ 



WKM 10672 (240229Z AUG 02). 

215 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III for details on Abu Zubaydah’ s intelligence production. As 
noted, Abu Zubaydah was taken into CIA custody on March 2002, and was hospitalized until April 15, 2002. 
During the months of April and May 2002, which included a period during which Abu Zubaydah was on life support 
and unable to speak, the interrogations of Abu Zubaydah produced 95 intelligence reports. Abu Zubaydah spent 
much of June 2002 and all of July 2002 in isolation, without being asked any questions. The CIA reinstituted 
contact with Abu Zubaydah on August 4, 2002, and immediately began using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques — including the waterboard. During the months of August and September 2002, Abu Zubaydah produced 
91 intelligence reports, four fewer than the first two months of his CIA detention. CIA records indicate that the type 
of intelligence Abu Zubaydah provided remained relatively constant prior to and after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. According to CIA records, Abu Zubaydah provided information on “al-Qa’ida activities, 
plans, capabilities, and relationships,” in addition to information on “its leadership structure, including personalities, 
decision-making processes, training, and tactics.” See also CIA paper entitled “Abu Zubaydah,” dated March 2005, 
as well as “Abu Zubaydah Bio” document, “Prepared on 9 August 2006.” 



216 



On August 30, 2002, ] 



|CTC Legal, 



met with NSC Legal Adviser John Bellinger to 



discuss Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation. See emailfrom: John Rizzo; to: John Moseman; subject: Meeting with NSC 
Lega^dviser; date: August 30, 2002; ALEC HU (052227Z SEP 02). In his email documenting the meeting, 
BCHHi “noted that we had employed the walling techniques, confinement box, waterboard, along with some of 
the other methods which also had been approved by the Attorney General,” and “reported that while the experts at 
the site and at Headquarters were still assessing the product of the recent sessions, it did appear that the current 
phase was producing meaningful results.” (See email from: John Rizzo; to: John Moseman; subject: Meeting with 
NSC Legal Adviser; date: August 30, 2002.) The email did not provide any additional detail on what was described 
to Bellinger with respect to either the use of the techniques or the “results” of the interrogation. It is unclear from 
CIA records whether the CIA ever informed the NSC Legal Adviser or anyone else at the NSC or the Department of 
Justice that Abu Zubaydah failed to provide information about future attacks against the United States or operatives 
tasked to commit attacks in the U.S. durin g or after the use of the CIA’s enhance d interrogation techniques. 

mi 1 1 hi i ’mi i 

Page 45 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ 




7NOFQRN 



DETENTION SITE GREEN, which CIA records indicate was authored by SWIGERT and 
DUNBAR, also viewed the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah as a success. The cable 
recommended that “the aggressive phase at [DETENTION SITE GREEN | should be used as a 
template tor future interrogation of high value captives,” 217 not because the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques produced useful information, but rather because their use confirmed that 
Abu Zubaydah did not possess the intelligence that CIA Headquarters had assessed Abu 
Zubaydah to have. The cable from the detention site stated: 

“Our goal was to reach the stage where we have broken any will or ability of 
subject to resist or deny providing us information (intelligence) to which he 
had access. We additionally sought to bring subject to the point that we 
confidently assess that lie does not/not possess undisclosed threat information, 
or intelligence that could prevent a terrorist event.” 218 

(TS//j|^^^^^^|^B^NE) The cable further recommended that psychologists — a likely 
reference to contractors SWIGERT and DUNBAR — “familiar with interrogation, exploitation 
and resistance to interrogation should shape compliance of high value captives prior to 
debriefing by substantive experts.” 219 

(TSi^|||^mi||||^^^NF) From Abu Zubaydah’s capture on March 28, 2002, to his transfer 
to Department of Defense custody on September 5, 2006, information provided by Abu 
Zubaydah resulted in 766 disseminated intelligence reports. 220 According to CIA documents, 

Abu Zubaydah provided information on “al-Qa’ida activities, plans, capabilities, and 
relationships,” in addition to information on “its leadership structure, including personalities, 
decision-making processes, training, and tactics.” 221 As noted, this type of information was 
provided by Abu Zubaydah before, during, and after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. At no time during or after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 



According to CIA records, on September 27, 2002, the CIA briefed the chairman and the vice chairman of the 
Committee, Senators Graham and Shelby, as well as the Committee staff directors, on Abu Zubaydah’s 
interrogation. The CIA’s memorandum of the briefing indicates that the chairman and vice chairman were briefed 
on “the enhanced techniques that h ad been employed,’’ as well as “the nature and quality of reporting provided by 
Ab u Zubaydah .” See (DIRECTOR ■■ (25201 8Z OCT 02). 

2,7 |^HH| 10644 (20I235Z AUG 02) 

10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

2,9 ^H 10644 (201235Z AUG 02) 

220 The Committee uses sole-source intelligence reporting in this summary. While CIA multi-source intelligence 
reports are included in the full Committee Study, the focus of the Committee analysis is on sole-source intelligence 
reporting, as these reports were deemed to more accurately reflect useful reporting from individual CIA detainees. 

As background, multi-source intelligence reports tire reports that contain data from multiple detainees. For example, 
a common multi-source report would result from the CIA showing a picture of an individual to all CIA detainees at 
a specific CIA detention site. A report would be produced regardless if detainees were or were no t able to identify 
or provide information on the individual. As a specific example, see HEADQUARTERS m (202255Z JUN 
06), which states that from January 1 , 2006 - April 30, 2006, information from Hambali was “used in the 
dissemination of three intelligence reports, two of which were non-recognitions of Guantanamo Bay detainees,” and 
the third of which “detailed [Hambali’s] statement that he knew of no threats or plots to attack any world sporting 
events.” Sole-source reports, by contrast, are based on specific information provided by one CIA detainee. 

221 CIA paper entitled, “Abu Zubaydah,” dated March 2005. Same information included in an “Abu Zubaydah 
Bio” document “Prepared on 9 August 2006.” 



TOP SECRET/ 




t/ NOFORN 



Page 46 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 




did Abu Zubaydah provide information about operatives in, or future attacks against, the United 
States. 222 

10. A CIA Presidential Daily Brief Provides Inaccurate Information on the Interrogation of 
Abu Zubaydah 

Although CIA personnel at DETENTION SITE GREEN agreed 
that Abu Zubaydah was compliant and cooperative, personnel at CIA Headquarters prepared a 
Presidential Daily Brief (PDB) in October 2002 that, according to a cable, “accurately reflected] 
the collective HQS view of the information provided [by Abu Zubaydah] to date.” 223 The 
October 2002 PDB stated Abu Zubaydah was still withholding “significant threat information,” 
including information on operatives in the United States, and that Abu “Zubaydah resisted 
providing useful information until becoming more cooperative in early August, probably in the 
hope of improving his living conditions.” 224 The PDB made no reference to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques or the counter-assessment from the detention site interrogation team 
indicating that Abu Zubaydah was cooperative and not withholding information. 225 

(TS/^|||||^^^^^|//NF) CIA documents identified the “key intelligence” acquired from 
Abu Zubaydah as information related to suspected terrorists Jose Padilla and Binyam 
Mohammad, information on English-speaking al-Qa’ida member Jaffar al-Tayyar, and 
information identifying KSM as the mastermind of the September 1 1, 2001, attacks who used the 
alias “Mukhtar.” 226 All of this information was acquired by FBI special agents shortly after Abu 
Zubaydah’ s capture. 227 

The CIA has consistently represented that Abu Zubaydah stated 
that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were necessary to gain his cooperation. For 
example, the CIA informed the OLC that: 

“As Zubaydah himself explained with respect to enhanced techniques, 

‘brothers who are captured and interrogated arc permitted by Allah to provide 

222 See Ab u Zubay dah detainee review in Volume III for additional details. 

223 ALEC ■■ (181 439Z OCT 02) 

224 ALEC (181 439Z OC T 02) _ 

225 Among other documents, see^^^KJH 10667 (231206Z AUG 02); HHlHi 10672 (240229Z AUG 02); and 
email from: [REDACTED] (^ of Base at DETENTION SITE GREEN); to: CIA Headquarters; subject: 
“Assessment to Date” of Abu Zubaydah; date: October 6, 2002, at 05:36:46 AM. 

226 See “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and KSM,” dated February 2008, updated for 
briefings on several dates, including for a 2009 briefing to Director Leon Panetta, as well as the “Effectiveness 
Memo” provided to the Department of Justice, testimony provided by CIA Director Michael Hayden, and other 
documents discussed in detail in Volume II. For example, see ODNI September 2006 press release stating: “During 
initial interrogation, Abu Zubaydah gave some information that he probably viewed as nominal. Some was 
important, however, including that Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM) was the 9/1 1 mastermind and used the 
moniker ‘Mukhtar.’ This identification allowed us to comb previously collected intelligence for both names, 
opening up new leads to this terrorist plotter — leads that eventually resulted in his capture. It was clear to his 
interrogators that Abu Zubaydah possessed a great deal of information about al-Qa’ida; however, he soon stopped 
all cooperation. Over the ensuing months, the CIA designed a new interrogation program that would be safe, 
effective, and legal.” 

227 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume 111 for additional details. 




Page 47 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O F Q RN 



information when they believe they have ‘reached the limit of their ability to 
withhold it’ in the face of psychological and physical hardships.’” 228 

A s * s described in greater detail in the full Committee Study, CIA 
records do not support the CIA representation that Abu Zubaydah made these statements. 229 CIA 
records indicate that Abu Zubaydah maintained that he always intended to talk and never 
believed he could withhold information from interrogators. 230 In February 2003, Abu Zubaydah 
told a CIA psychologist that he believed prior to his capture that every captured “brother” would 
talk in detention and that he told individuals at a terrorist training camp that “brothers should be 
able to expect that the organization will make adjustments to protect people and plans when 
someone with knowledge is captured.” 231 

11. The CIA Does Not Brief the Committee on the Interrogation of Abu Zubaydah 



(T In contrast to relatively open communications that the CIA had 
with the Committee following the issuance of the September 17, 2001, MON, the CIA 
significantly limited its communications with the Committee on its detention and interrogation 
activities after Abu Zubaydah’ s capture on March 28, 2002. 232 In responses to three different 
sets of Committee Questions for the Record addressed to the CIA regarding the MON authorities 
in the spring and summer of 2002, the CIA provided no indication that the CIA had established 
DETENTION SITE GREEN, or was using, or considering using, coercive interrogation 
techniques. 233 

On September 27, 2002, CIA officials provided a briefing on Abu 
Zubaydah’ s interrogation only to Committee Chairman Bob Graham, Vice Chairman Richard 
Shelby, and their staff directors. After this briefing Chairman Graham made multiple and 



228 



Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 1 1). This OLC memorandum 
cite^CIA memorandum for Steve Bradbury at the Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from KflP I 
HHH’ HI Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist 
Interrogation Techniques.” 

^MVhil^her^re no records of Abu Zubaydah making these statements, the deputy chief of ALEC Station, 

told the Inspector General on July 17, 2003, t hat the “best information [the CIA] received on 
howtohandle die [CIA] detainees came from a walk-in [a source 

SBJHI to volunteer information to the CIA] after the arrest of Abu Zubaydah. He told us we were 
underestimating Al-Qa’ida. The detainees were happy to be arrested by the U.S. because they got a big show trial. 
When they were turned over to [foreign governments], they were treated badly so they talked. Allah apparently 
allows you to talk if you feel threatened. The [CIA] detainees never counted on being detained by us outside the 



U.S. and being subjected to methods they never dreamed of.” See \ 



|, Memorandum for the Record; 



subiecLMeeting with deputy chief. Counterterrorist Center ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003. 



230 



10496 ( 1 620 14Z FEB 03 
Zubaydah’s explanations more fully (f 

231 



For more information, see a March 7, 2005, cable describing Abu 
"2166 (070647Z MAR 05)). 

10496 (162014Z FEB 03) For additional details on this matter, see Volume II, specifically the section 
on information provided by the CIA to the Department of Justice. 

232 The information provided by the CIA to the Committee on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program is 
summarized later in this document, and described in greater detail in Volume IL 

233 See Volume II, specifically the section on CIA representations to Congress. 

ini 1 'ii i in i mill 

Page 48 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



specific requests for additional information on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 
Internal CIA emails include discussion of how the CIA could “get.. . off the hook on the cheap” 
regarding Chairman Graham’s requests for additional information. 234 In the end, CIA officials 
simply did not respond to Graham’s requests prior to his departure from the Committee in 
January 2003. 

C. Interrogation in Country | and the January 2003 Guidelines 

1. The CIA Establishes DETENTION SITE COBALT, Places Inexperienced First-Tour 
Officer in Charge 



Plans for a specialized CIA detentionfacilityin Country | began 
in April 2002, with the intention that it would be “totally under [|^^^^H]/Station 
Control.” 235 On June 6, 2002, CIA Headquarters approved more than $200,000 for the 
construction of the facility, identified in this summary as “DETENTION SITE COBALT.” 236 In 
a 2003 inte rview with the C IA Office of Inspector General, Associate Deputy Director for 
Operations described his views of this facility and “stated that [DETENTION 

SITE COBALT] was opened be cause there needed to be a detention site in [Country |] for those 
detainees enroute to [DETENTION SITE GREEN]. It was not a place for the use 

ofEITs.” 237 

DETENTION SITE COBALT, constructed with CIA funding, 
opened in Country | in September 2002. 238 According to CIA records, the windows at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT were blacked out and detainees were kept in total darkness. The 
guards monitored detainees using headlamps and loud music was played 
constantly in the facility. While in their cells, detainees were shackled to the wall and given 
buckets for human waste. Four of the twenty cells at the facility included a bar across the top of 
the cell. 239 Later reports describe detainees being shackled to the bar with their hands above 
their heads, forcing them to stand, and therefore not allowing the detainees to sleep. 240 



234 Email from: Stanley Moskowitz; to: John H. Moseman; cc: Scott Muller and James Pavitt; subject: [attached 
document] Re: Graham request on interrogations; date: December 9, 2002, at 05:46:11 PM. 

235 By June 2002 the CIA had t aken custo dy of five detainees who were captured outside of Country H and placed 

detention facilities. The det ainees were held at the Coun try^ facilities at 



these CIA detainees in Country 
the request of the CIA and the CIA had unlimited access to them. 



21147 



236 DIRECTOR (0622 12Z JUN 02) 

237 Interview Report, 2003-7 123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, mm, 
September 9, 2003. 

238 For additional information on DETENTION SITE COBALT, see Volume 1 and Volume III. The specific date 
ha s been generalized at the req uest of the CIA. 

239 ^ 1 28246 

240 For additional information on DETENTION SITE COBALT, see Volume I an^Volum^U^n^mon^ther 

documents: 31118 DlRECTO^J^^HJ|^HpH||m||; email 

from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], ||^^^H|^B[REDACTED]; 
subject: Meeting with SO & Federal Bureau of Prisons; date: December 4, 2002; email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
[REDACTED]; subject: Meeting with SO & Federal Bureau of Prisons; date: December 5, 2002; Special Review, 
Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities (September200^^ctober 2003) (2003 -7 123-IG), May 7, 
2004; Memorandum for Deputy Director ofOperations^from^|^H|^^^^^H, January 28, 2003, Subject: 

TOP 

Page 49 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



The CIA officer in charge of DETENTION SITE COBALT, 
HHH [CIA OFFICER 1], was a junior officer on his first overseas assign ment with 
no previous experience or training in handling prisoners or conducting interrogations. BHU 
[CIA OFFICER 1 ] was the DETENTION SITE COBALT manager during the period in which a 
CIA detainee died and numerous CIA detainees were subjected to unapp roved coerciv e 
interrogation techniques. 241 A review of CIA records found that prior to [CIA 

OFFICER l’s] deployment and assignment as the CIA ’s DETENTION SITE COBALT 
manager, other CIA officers recommended [CIA OFFICER 1] not have continued 

access to classified information due to a “lack of honesty , judgment, and maturity.” 242 
According to records, “the chief of CTC told [Hi^H [CIA OFFICER ^baUie would not 
want [him] in his overseas station.” 243 A supervising officer assessed that [CIA 

OFFICER 1]: 



“has issues with judgment and maturity, [and his] potential behavior i n the 
field is also worrisome. [The officer] further advised that [|m|H [CIA 
OFFICER 1]] was only put into processing for an overseas position so that 
someone would evaluate all of the ev idence of this situation all together. [The 
officer further noted that [|^H| [CIA OFFICER 1]] might not listen to his 
chief of station when in the field.” 244 

2. CIA Records Lack Information on CIA Detainees and Details of Interrogations in 
Country | 



Detainees held in Country | were detained under the authority of 
the MON; however, CIA officers conducted no written assessment of whether these detainees 



DeaO^nvestigation - Gul RAHMAN; and CIA Inspector General, Reportoflnvestigation, Death of a Detainee | 
mmi (2003-7402 -IG), April 27, 2005. One senior interrogator, told the CIA OIG that 

“literally, a detainee could go for days or weeks without anyone looking at him,” and that his team found one 
detainee who, ‘“as far as we could determine,’ had been chained to the wall in a standing position for 17 days.” 
According to the CIA interrogator, some of the CIA detainees at DETENTION SITE COBALT “‘literally looked 
like a dog that had been kenneled.’ When the doors to their cells were opened, ‘ they cowered.’” ( See Interview 
Report, 2003-7123-IG, Revie\^)Hnterrogation s for Counterterrorism Purposes, April 30, 2003.) 

The chief of interrogations, told the CIA OIG that “[DETENTION SITE COBALT] is good for 

interrogations because it is the closest thing he has seen to a dungeon, facilitating the displacement of detainee 

K ' ions.” ( See Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, | 
April 7, 2003.) An analyst who conducted interrogations at DETENTION SITE COBALT told the CIA 
OIG that “[DETENTION SITE COBALT] is ai^I^^5ee Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of 

Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, HHHHE May 8, 2003.) 

241 See April 27, 2005, CIA Inspector General, Report of Investigation: Death of a Detainee 
April 7, 2005, Memorandum for John Helgerson, I nspecto^eneral, from Robert Grenier, Subject: Comments on 
Draft Report of Investigation: Death of a Detainee (2003-7402-IG). 




[CIA OFFICER 1]| 
[CIA OFFICER 1]| 



TOPSEGRET/, 



/NOFORN 



Page 50 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET^ 



//N O F O R N 



“pose[d] a continuing, serious threat of violence or death to U.S. persons and interests or. . . 

[we]re planning terrorist activities.” The CIA maintained such poor records of its detainees in 
Country | during this period that the CIA remains unable to determine the number and identity 
of the individuals it detained. The full details of the CIA interrogations there remain largely 
unknown, as DETENTION SITE COBALT was later found to have not reported multiple uses of 
sleep deprivation, required standing, loud music, sensory deprivation, extended isolation, 
reduced quantity and quality of food, nudity, and “rough treatment” of CIA detainees. 245 

3. CIA Headquarters Recommends That Untrained Interrogators in Country | Use the 
CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques on Ridha al-Najjar 



Ridha al-Najjar was the first CIA detainee to be held at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT. Al-Najjar, along with Hassan Muhammad Abu Bakr an^a 
number of oth er indi viduals, was arrested in Karachi, Pakistan, after raids conducted by 

jHMflMHBPukistan^^^l in late May 2002. 246 Al-Najjar was identified by the CIA as a 
former bod yguard for Usa ma bin Laden, 247 and was rendered with Abu Bakr to CIA custody at a 
Country | detention facility on June |, 2002. 248 Ridha al-Najjar was transferred 

to DETENTION SITE COBALT on September 2002. 249 



While the CIA was describing to the Department of Justice why it 
needed to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah, a parallel 
internal discussion at the CIA was taking place regarding Ridha al-Najjar. An ALEC Station 
cable from a CTC officer stated that, on June 27, 2002: 



“ALEC /HQS held a strategy session regarding the interrogation of high 
priority detainee Ridha Ahmed al-Najjar in [Country |], The 

goal of the session was to review the progress of the interrogation to date and 
to devi se a general plan as to how best to proceed once the new [Country | 
detention/debriefing facility [i.e., DETENTION SITE COBALT] is 
completed.” 250 



The meeting participants included individuals who were also 
involved in dis cussions related to A bu Zubaydah’ s interrogation^ncludm chief of 

ALEC Station, H^BH^TC Legal and the chief 



245 The full Committee Study includes a CIA photograph of a waterboard at DETENTION SITE COBALT. While 
there are no records of the CIA using the waterboard at COBALT, the waterboard device in the photograph is 
surrounded by buckets, with a bottle of unknown pink solution (filled two thirds of the way to the top) and a 
watering can resting on the wooden beams of the waterboard. In meetings between the Committee Staff and the 
CIA in the summer of 2013, the CIA was unable to explain die details of the photograph, to include the buckets, 
sol ution, and wate ring c an, as well as the waterboard’ s presen ce at COBALT. 

246 ■■■ 1 1 357 1 1443 

247 55 

248 ^ 

249 27054 

250 I I I —l M I llll 02). Although the plans at the time were for DETENTION SITE COBALT to be 
owned and operated by the Country | government, the detention site was controlled and overseen by die CIA and 
its officers from the day it became operati onal in September 2002. 

iiii 1 1 iii i 1 i mi him i 

Page 5 1 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



//NOFORN 



the ^ on 
2002, to the CIA Station in Country | suggesting possible interrogation techniques to use 
against Ridha al-Najjar, including: 

• utilizing “Najjar’s fear for the well-being of his family to our benefit,” with the cable 
explicitly stating that interrogators could not “threaten his family with imminent death”; 

• using “vague threats” to create a “mind virus” that would cause al-Najjar to believe that 
his situation would continue to get worse until he cooperated; 252 

• manipulating Ridha al-Najjar’ s environment using a hood, restraints, and music; and 

• employing sleep deprivation through the use of round-the-clock interrogations 253 

The cable went on to note that the “possibility that [al-Najjar] may 
have current threat or lead information demands that we keep up the pressure on him.” 254 With 
the exception of a brief mention of “diminished returns from the most recent interviews of al- 
Najjar,” and references to the detainee’s complaints about physical ailments, the cable offers no 
evidence al-Najjar was actively resisting CIA interrogators. 255 

Ten days later, on July 26, 2002, CIA officers in Country |, none 
of whom had been trained in the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, proposed 
putting al-Najjar in isolation 256 and using “sound disorientation techniques,” “sense of time 
deprivation,” limited light, cold temperatures, and sleep deprivation. 257 The CIA officers added 
that they felt they had a “reasonable chance of breaking Najjar” to get “the intelligence and 
locator lead information on UBL and Bin Ladin’s family.” 258 The plan for al-Najjar was 
circulated to senior CIA officers as part of the Daily DCI Operations Update. 259 



251 ALEC 
Legal, 




ICTC 



162135Z JUL 02). The deputy chief of ALEC Station, and | 

would later travel to DETENTION SITE GREEN to observe the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah. 

252 The term “mind virus” first appeared in the interrogations of Abu Zubaydah. See 10086 (201900Z 

APR 02). 

253 Refere nced Jul y 16, 2002, cable is ALEC ■■ (162135Z JUL 02). 

(162135Z JUL 02) 

(162135Z JUL 02) 

256 At this time, July 26, 2002, Abu Zubaydah was in isolation at DETENTION SITE GREEN. Abu Zubaydah was 
placed in isolation on June 18, 2002, and remained in isolation for 47 days, until the CIA began subjecting him to its 
en hanced interrogation techniq ues on August 4, 2002. 

25107 (260903Z JUL 02) 

25107 (260903Z JUL 02) 

259 Email from: [REDACT ED]; to: Buzzy Kro ngard, John O. Brennan, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], John H. 

REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



254 ALEC 

255 ALEC 




Moseman, [REDACTED], 
[RED ACTED], [RED ACTED], 
Mudd, I 




|, Jose RodriguezJ 



I, John P. 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 52 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



On August 5, 2002, the day after Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation 
using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques at DETENTION SITE GREEN began, CIA 
Headquarters authorized the proposed interrogation plan for al-Najjar, to include the use of loud 
music (at less than the level that would cause physical harm such as permanent hearing loss), 
worse food (as long as it was nutritionally adequate for sustenance), sleep deprivation, and 
hooding. 260 

More than a month later, on September 21, 2002, CIA interrogators 
described al-Najjar as “clearly a broken man” and “on the verge of complete breakdown” as 
result of the isolation. 261 The cable added that al-Najjar was willing to do whatever the CIA 
officer asked. 262 



(T& ) In October 2002, officers from the U.S. military conducted a short 
debriefing of al-Najjar at DETENTION SITE COBALT and subsequently expressed an interest 
in a more thorough debriefing. 263 On November 2002, a U.S. military legal advisor visited 
DETENTION SITE COBALT and described it as a “CIA detentioi^acility/^i^ing that “while 
CIA is the only user of the facility they contend it is a [Country facility.” 264 

The U.S. military officer also noted that the junior CIA officer designated as warden of the 
facility “has little to no experience with interrogating or handling prisoners.” With respect to al- 
Najjar specifically, the legal advisor indicated that the CIA’s interrogation plan included 
“isolation in total darkness; lowering the quality of his food; keeping him at an uncomfortable 
temperature (cold); [playing music] 24 hours a day; and keeping him shackled and hooded.” In 
addition, al-Najjar was described as having been left hanging — which involved handcuffing one 
or both wrists to an overhead bar which would not allow him to lower his arms — for 22 hours 
each day for two consecutive days, in order to “‘break’ his resistance.” It was also noted al- 
Najjar was wearing a diaper and had no access to toilet facilities. 265 




: ) The U.S. military legal advisor concluded that, because of al- 



Najjar’ s treatment, and the concealment of the facility from the I CRC, milita ry participation in 
al-Najjar’ s interrogation would involve risks for the U.S. military HUH. Th^ega^dvisor 
recommended briefing the CIA’s detention and interrogation activities to U.S. 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: ABU ZUBAYDAH - SENSITIVE ADDENDUM TO DC1 DAILY 1630 
OPS UPDATE -26 JUL Y; date: July 26, 2002. 

260 DIRECTOR mi (052309Z AUG 02). The OLC opinion that reviewed and approved the use of CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, signed on August 1, 2002, was specific to Abu Zubaydah. The Office of Legal 
Counsel did not produce legal opinions for al-Najjar or other detainees held by or for the CIA until August 2004. 

261 [REDACTED] 27297 (210713Z SEP 02) 

262 [REDACTED] 27297 (210713Z SEP 
November |, 2002, Me moran dum for 

Subject: Legal Analysis of HI Personnel Participating in Interrogation at the CIA Detention Facility in 
[REDACTED] (aka “[DETENTION SITECOBAUTX^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 
November |, 2002, Me moran dum for 

Subject: Legal Analysis of dl Personnel Participating in Interrogation at the CIA Detention Facility in 
[REDACTED] (aka “[DETENTION SIT E COBALT]”). 

November |, 2002, Me moran dum for m[|mm^^H||||[m[|m||H||, 
Subject: Legal Analysis of Jd Personnel Participating in Interrogation at the CIA Detention Facility in 
[REDACTED] (aka “[DETENTION SITE COBALT]”). 



Page 53 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



[combatant command] to alert the command of the risks prior to the U.S. military 
HHIRbeing involved in any aspect of the interrogation of al-Najjar. 266 According to the CIA 
inspector general, the detention and interrogation of Ridha al-Najjar “became the model” for 
handling other CIA detainees at DETENTION SITE COBALT. 267 The CIA disseminated one 
intelligence report from its detention and interrogation of Ridha al-Najjar. 268 

4. Death of Gul Rahman Leads CIA Headquarters to Learn of Unreported Coercive 
Interrogation Techniques at DETENTION SITE COBALT; CIA Inspector General 
Review Reveals Lack of Oversight of the Detention Site 



1° November 2002, ALEC Station officers requested that CIA 
contract interrogator Hammond DUNBAR, one of the two primary interrogators of Abu 
Zubaydah in August 2002, travel to DETENTION SITE COBALT to assess a detainee for the 
possible use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogationtecM While DUNBAR was present at 

DETENTION SITE COBALT, he assistedflHHJlH [CIA OFFICER 1] in the 
interrogations of Gul Rahman, a suspected Islamic extremist. As reported to CIA Headquarters, 
this interrogation included “48 hours of sleep deprivation, auditory overload, total darkness, 
isolation, a cold shower, and rough treatment.” CIA Headquarters did not approve these 
interrogation techniques in advance. Upon receipt of these cables, however, officers at CIA 
Headquarters responded that they were “motivated to extract any and all operational information 
on al-Qa’ida and Hezbi Islami from Gul Rahman” and suggested that “enhanced measures” 
might be needed to gain Gul Rahman’s compliance. CIA Headquarters also requested that a 
psychological assessment of Rahman be completed. 270 Prior to DUNBAR’s departure from the 
detention site on November |, 2002, [a few days before the death of Gul Rahman] DUNBAR 
proposed the u se of the C IA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on other detainees and offered 
suggestions to [CIA OFFICER 1], the site manager, on the use of such techniques. 271 



c ) On November H, 2002, 



[CIA OFFICER 1] ordered that 



Gul Rahman be shackled to the wall of his cell in a position that re quired the d etainee to rest on 
the bare concrete floor. Rahman was wearing only a sweatshirt, as [CIA OFFICER 1] 

had ordered that Rahman’s clothing be removed when he had been judged to be uncooperative 
during an earlier interrogation. The next day, the guards found Gul Rahman’s dead body. An 
internal CIA review and autopsy assessed that Rahman likely died from hypothermia — in part 



November |, 2002, Me morand um for ^ 

Subject: Legal Analysis of m|Personnel Participating in Interrogation at the CIA Detention Facility in 

[REDACTED] (aka “[DETENTION SITE COBALT]”). 

“^According to the 1G report, “in late July or early August 2002, a senio^peration^fficeron TDY to HHH 
BBBB interrogated a particularly obstinate detainee [Ridha al-Najjar] at detention facility 

that was used before [COBALT] was opened. The officer drafted a cable that proposed techniques that, ultimately, 
becam^h^uodel for [COBALT].” See April 27, 2005, report by the CIA Inspector General, Death of a Detainee | 
MUHH (2003-74024G)^e^fc^[nterview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for 
Counterterrorism Purposes, |^^^|HH||^pdn0^003; Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of 
Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes7||^^|^^^|, April 2, 2003. 

268 See Volume II and Volume III for additional information. 




Page 54 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T 



//NOF O R N 



from having been forced to sit on the bare concrete floor without pants. 272 [CIA 

OFFICER l’s] initial cable to CIA Headquarters on Rahman’s death included a number of 
misstatements and omissions that were not discovered until internal investigations into Rahman’s 
death. 273 

The death of Gul Rahman resulted in increased attention to CIA 
detention and interrogation activities in Country | by CIA Headquarters. The CTC formally 
designated the CTC’s Renditions Group 274 as the responsible entity for the management and 
maintenance of all CIA interrogation facilities, including DETENTION SITE COBALT, in early 
December 2002. 275 Despite this change, many of the same individuals within the CIA — 
including DUNBAR, officers at DETENTION SITE COBALT, and officers within ALEC 
Station who had recommended the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against 
Gul Rahman — remained key figures in the CIA interrogation program and received no reprimand 
or sanction for Rahman’s death. Instead, in March 2003, j ust four months aft er the death of Gul 
Rahman, the CIA Station in Country | recommended that ^^^^fm^^^CI^OFFlCER 1] 
receive a “cash award” of $2,500 for his “consistently iiipi mu wml " u " [CIA 

OFFICER 1] remained in his position as manager of the detention site until July 2003 and 
continued to be involved in the interrogations of other CIA detainees. He was formally certified 
as a CIA interrogator in April 2003 after the practical portion of his training requirement was 
waived because of his past experience with interrogations at DETENTION SITE COBALT. 277 



January 28, 2003, Subject: Death 



272 Memorandum for Deputy Director of Operations, from 
Investigation - Gul RAHMAN. Other contributing factors were identified as dehydration, lack of food, and 
immobility due to “short chaining.” 



30211 



See Volume I and III for additional details. 



As noted, the Renditions Group was also known during the program as the “Renditions and Interrogations 
Group,” as well as the “Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Group,” and by the initials, “RDI” and “RDG.” 
(03233 6Z D EC 02) 

DIRECTOR 1° late 2005, the CIA convened an Accountability Board to review the 

actions of CIA personnel in Gul Rahman’s death. The board recommended that the executive director “impose a 10 




275 DIRECTOR 

276 

277 



day suspension without pay” on 



|CIA OFFICER 1], and noted that this action would “strike the 



appropriate balance between: 1) the fact that 



[CIA OFFICER 1]] was the only individual who made 



decisions that led directly, albeit unintentionally, to Rahman’s death, and 2) the significant weight the Board 
attac hed to the mitigating factors at play in this incident.” ( See Memorandum for Executive Director from P 
H, Deputy Director for Science and Technology, re: Report and Recommendations of the Special Accountability 
Board Regarding the Death ofAfghanDetainee Gul Rahman.) On February 10, 2006, however, the CIA Executive 
Director K.B. Foggo notified |^HH [CIA OFFICER 1 ] that he intended to take no disciplinary action against 
him. In his memo describing that decision, the executive director stated: “While not condoning your actions, it is 
imperative, in my view, that they... be judged within the operational context that existed at the time of Rahman’s 
detention. Cable traffic reviewed by the board shows conclusively that Headquarters generally was aware of, and 
posed no objections to, the confinement conditions and interrogation techniques being imposed on Rahman as late as 



ing 

November. On that date, Headquarters notified [the CIA Station in COUNTRY |]... that it was ‘motivated to 
extract any and all operational information’ from Rahman, that it rated achieving Rahman’s cooperation to be of 
‘great importance’ and that it acknowledged that Rahman ‘may need to be subje cted to enhanced in terrogation 
measures to induce him to comply.” ( See February 10, 2006, Memorandum for [CIA OFFICER 

1]], CounterTerrorist Center, National Clandestine Service, from Executive Director, re: “Accountability Decision.”) 
With regard to the death of Gul Rahman, the CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “Most egregiously, we believe that 
CIA leaders erred in not holding anyone formally accountable for the actions and failure of management related to 
the death of Gul Rahman at [COBALT] in 2002. We understand the reasoning underlying CIA management’s 
decision to overturn an accountability boar d recommendation that would have im posed sanctions on the least 

mi 1 1 1 in i 

Page 55 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



A TOF Q R N 



Later investigations of DETENTION SITE COBALT conducted 
by the CIA inspector general and the deputy director of operations following the death of Gul 
Rahman found that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — and other coercive 
interrogation techniques — was more widespread than was reported in contemporaneous CIA 
cables. Specifically, the interrogation techniques that went unreported in CIA cables included 
standing sleep deprivation in which a detainee’s arms were shackled above his head, nudity, 
dietary manipulation, exposure to cold temperatures, cold showers, “rough takedowns,” and, in 
at least two instances, the use of mock executions. 278 

NovembeM8^002^tafHrom the CIA’s Office of Inspector 
General contacted ^H|^U|CTC Legal, to indicate their interest in being 

briefed by CTC on the detention facility in Country |. At their meeting with the DDO and the 
chief of CTC on November 2002, the OIG staff explained that, while in that country on a 
separate matter, the staff had overheard a conversation that included references to “war crimes” 
and “torture” at a CIA detention facility and were therefore seeking to follow-up on this 
information. According to notes from the meeting, the DDO described the “most recent event 
concerning Gul Rahman” — his death, which occurred on November 2002. 279 



experienced officer involved. The most junior in the chain of command should not have to bear the full weight of 
accountability when larger, systemic problems exist and when they are thrust into difficult battlefield situations by 
their supervisors and given a risky and difficult task and little preparation or guidance. Still, it is hard to accept that 
a CIA officer does not bear at least some responsibility for his or her actions, even under trying circumstances.” 

278 Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities (Septemb er 2001 - October 200 3) 
(2003-7 123-IG), May 7, 2004; Memorandum for Deputy Director of Operations, from January 

28, 2003, Subiect^eath Investigation - Gul RAHMAN; CIA Inspector General, Report of Investigation, Death of a 
Detainee (2003-7402-IG), April 27, 2005. Inspector General records of the interview of a senior CIA 

debriefer indicated that, “[djuring the two weeks of interrogation training, she heard stories of [COBALT] detainees 
being ‘hung for days on end,’ not being fed, mock assassinations, and at least one case of a detainee being 
repeatedly choketL^Theseniordebriefer also informed the Office of Inspector General that, “[s]he heard that while 
at [COBALT] aka “CIA OFFICER 2”] had hung detainees up for long periods with their toes 

barely touching the ground.” {See interview report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism 



Purposes, 

Rahman at COBALT. 



[, April 5, 2003.) DUNBAR described a “rough takedown” following the death of Gul 
According to [DUNBAR], there were approximately five CIA officers from the renditions 
team. Each one had a role during the takedown and it was thoroughly planned and rehearsed. They opened the door 
of Rahman’s cell and rushed in screaming and yelling for him to ‘get down.’ They dragged him outside, cut off his 
clothes and secured him with Mylar tape. They covered his head with a hood and ran him up and down a long 
corridor adjacent to his cell. They slapped him and punched him several times. [DUNBAR] stated that although it 
was obvious they were not trying to hit him as hard as they could, a couple of times the punches were forceful. As 
they ran him along the corridor, a couple of times he fell and they dragged him through the dirt (the floor outside of 
the cells is dirt). Rahman did acquire a number of abrasions on his face, legs, and hands, but nothing that required 
medical attention. (This may account for the abrasions found on Rahman’s body after his death. Rahman had a 
number of surface abrasions on his shoulders, pelvis, arms, legs, and face.) At this point, Rahman was returned to 



his cell and secured. [DUNBAR] stated that 



[CIA OFFICER 1 ] J [the CIA officer in charge of 



DETENTIO N SITE COBALT] may have spoken to Rahman for a few moments, but he did not know what 
imm [CIA OFFICER 1]] said. [DUNBAR] stated that after something like this is done, interrogators should 
speak to the priso ner to ‘give them som ething to think about.’” {See Memorandum for Deputy Director of 
Operations, from 
279 See Notes of November 




|, January 28, 2003, Subject: Death Investigation - Gul RAHMAN, pp. 21-22.) 
j, 2002, meeting D/IG [REDACTED]. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 56 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



In January 2003, CIA Inspector General John Helgerson began a 
formal review of the death of Gul Rahman and began a separate review of the entire CIA 
Detention and Interrogation Program. The resulting Special Review of Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities (“Special Review”) found that there were no guidelines 
for the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques at DETENTION SITE COBALT 
prior to December 2002, and that interrogators, some with little or no training, were “left to their 
own devices in working with detainees.” 280 

The Inspector General’s Special Review also revealed the lack of 
oversight of DETENTION SITE COBALT by CIA leadership. DCI Tenet stated that he was 
“not very familiar” with DETENTION SITE COBALT and “whaUh^I^s doing with medium 
value targets.” 281 Associate Deputy Director of Operations stated that he was 

unaware that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were being used there 282 In August 
2003, CIA General Counsel Scott Muller relayed that he was under the impression that 
DETENTION SITE COBALT was only a holding facility and that he had “no idea who is 
responsible for [COBALT].” 283 Senior Deputy General Counsel John Rizzo informed the OIG 
that he knew little about DETENTION SITE COBALT and that his focus wasonDETENTION 
SITE GREEN a nd DETENTION SITE BLUE. 284 CTC Chief of Operations ■■ 

stated that he had much less knowledge of operations at DETENTION SITE 
COBALT, and that the CIA’s GREEN and BLUE detention sites were much more important to 
him. 285 Finally, Chief of CTC Jose Rodriguez stated that he did not focus on DETENTION 
SITE COBALT because he had “other higher priorities.” 286 

5. The CIA Begins Training New Interrogators; Interrogation Techniques Not Reviewed by 
the Department of Justice Included in the Training Syllabus 



280 See Office of Inspector General Special Review of Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities 
(September 2001 -October 2003), May 7, 2004, p. 52. According to an OIG interview with an analyst who 
conducted i nterrogations at DETENTION SITE COBALT, “indicative of the lack of interrogators was the fact that 

[CIA OFFICER 1]] enlisted a [REDACTED] case officer friend... to conducUnterrogation^ 
[DETENTION SITE COBALT] after he completed his [REDACTED] business in 

(See Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for l minli il inn in I' m | u i i May 

8, 2003.) Inspector General records of an interview with a senior CIA debriefer indicate that the debriefer, “heard 
prior to taking the [interrogator] training that people at [COBALT] had debriefed detainees on their own, sometimes 
going out to the site at n ight.” ( See Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism 
Purposes, April 5, 2003.) As described elsewhere, DCI Tenet issued formal interrogation guidelines 

for the program on January 28, 2003. (See Guidelines on Interrogations Conducted Pursuant to the Presidential 
Memorandum of Notification of 17 September 2001, signed by George Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence, 
January 28, 2003.) 

281 Interview of George Tenet, by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, memorandum 
dated, Septembe^^OO^^^^ 

282 Interview of Office of the Inspector General, September 9, 2003. 

283 Interview of Scott Muller, by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector 
General, August 20, 2003. 

284 Interview of John Rizzo, by [REDACTED], [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 
August 14, 2003^^^^^^^^^^^ 

285 Interview of Office of the Inspector General, February 11, 2003. 

286 Interview of Jose Rodriguez, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 12, 



2003. 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O FOR N 



Page 57 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ 



//NOFORN 



The CIA’s CTC Renditions Group began preparing for the first 
CIA interrogator training course in August 2002 — during the period in which Abu Zubaydah was 
being interrogate^ising the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniquesui^ETENTION SITE 
GREEN. ■■■I, the CIA’s chief of interrogations, 287 and]|^^|^^|^H|, the CIA 
officer with OTS who had spent | years as a SERE Instructor with JPRA, led the interrogation 
training. The first interrogation training, conducted with the assistance of JPRA personnel, 
occurred from November 12, 2002, to November 18, 2002. 288 The class included eight students 
who were seeking to become CIA interrogators and three students seeking to support the CIA 
interrogation process. 289 The CIA training program involved 65 hours of instruction and training 
on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including at least two interrogation techniques 
whose legality had not been evaluated by the Department of Justice: the “abdominal slap” and 
the “finger press.” Although a number of personnel at CIA Headquarters reviewed the training 
materials, there are no CIA records of any CIA officer raising objections to the techniques being 
included in the syllabus. 290 

6. Despite Recommendation from CIA Attorneys , the CIA Fails to Adequately Screen 
Potential Interrogators in 2002 and 2003 



On NovemberB^002^fter the completion of the first formal 
tminin^lassT^^^^^HCTC Legal, asked CTC attorney 

to “[mjake it known that from now on, CTC/LGL must vet all person nel who are 
enrolled in, observing or teaching - or otherwise associated with - the class.” 291 
added: 



“Moreover, we will be forced to Disapprove [sic] the participation of specific 
personnel in the use of enhanced techniques unless we have ourselves vetted 



287 December 4, 2002, Training Report, High Value Target Interrogatior^n^Exploitation (HVTIE) Training 

Seminar 12-18 No^O^pilo^unning) at 4. See also email from: to: [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], subject: Formation of a High Value Target Interrogation team (describing initial 

training plan and requirements); date: August 30, 2002, at 8:30 AM. 

288 December 4, 2002, Training Report, High Value Target Interrogation and Exploitation (HVTIE) Training 
Seminar 12-18 Nov 02 (pilot running). 

289 December 4, 2002, Training Report, High Value Target Interrogation and Exploitation (HVTIE) Training 
Seminar 12-18 Nov 02 (pilot run ning), at 15. 

290 See. for example, email from: to: [ REDACTED]; subject: HVT training 

date: October 10, 2002; email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: HVT tmining^ate^ctober 10, 2002; November 1, 2002, 
Memorandum for: Director, DCI Counterterrorist Center, from Chief, Renditions Group, 

CTC, re: Request for use of Military Trainers in Support of Agency Interrogation Course, REFERENCE: Memo for 
D/CTC from C/RG/CTC, dtd 26 Au^2, Same Subject. 

291 Email from: H^HjHHjj^HRJP^TC/LGL; to: [REDACTED]; cc: Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], 

[RED ACTED], ^ subject: EYES ONLY; date: November 2002, at 03:13:01 PM. As 
described above, Gul RahmaiHikel^roze to death at DETENTION SITE COBALT sometime in the morning of 
November 2002. email, however, appears to have been drafted before the guards had 

found Gul Rahman’ s body and before that death was reported to CIA Headquarters. See [REDACTED] 3021 1 

describing the guards observingG^Rahmanalivein^e morning of November 2002. Gul 

Rahman’s death appeared in cable traff ic at least after email. No records could be identified 

to provide the impetus for e mail. 

mi 1 1 iii i 1 '"i mi n niii'i 

Page 58 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQFORN 



them and are satisfied with their qualifications and suitability for what are 
clearly unusual measures that are lawful only when practiced correctly by 
personnel whose records clearly demonstrate their suitability for that role. The 
vetting process will not be that dissimilar from the checks that are provided by 
the OIG, OS, etc. in certain cases before individuals are promoted or receive 
awards, and the selection and training of aggressive interrogators certainly 
warrants a similar vetting process.” 292 

The chief of CTC, Jose Rodriguez, objected to this approach, 

stating: 



“I do not think that CTC/LGL should or would want to get into the business of 
vetting participants, observers, instructors or others that are involved in this 
program. It is simply not your job. Your job is to tell all what are the 
acceptable legal standards for conducting interrogations per the authorities 
obtained from Justice and agreed upon by the White House.” 293 

Contrary to statements later made by CIA Director Michael 
Hayden and other CIA officials that “fajll those involved in the questioning of detainees are 
carefully chosen and screened for demons trated profess ional judgment and maturity,” 294 CIA 
records suggest that the vetting sought by did not take place. The Committee 

reviewed CIA records related to several CIA officers and contractors involved in the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program, most of whom conducted interrogations. The Committee 
identified a number of personnel whose backgrounds include notable derogatory information 
calling into question their eligibility for employment, their access to classified information, and 
their participation in CIA interrogation activities. In nearly all cases, the derogatory information 
was known to the CIA prior to the assignment of the CIA officers to the Detention and 
Interrogation Program. This group of officers included individuals who, among other issues, had 
engaged in inappropriate detainee interrogations, had workplace anger management issues, and 
had reportedly admitted to sexual assault. 295 

7. Bureau of Prisons "WOW’ed” by Level of Deprivation at CIA ’s COBALT Detention Site 



I* 1 December 2002, the CIA’s Renditions Group sent a team of 
recently trained interrogators to DETENTION SITE COBALT to engage in interrogations. The 
interrogation plans proposed by that team for at least three detainees at DETENTION SITE 



292 Email from: 

[REDACTED], 

293 Email from: Jose Rodriguez; to: 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

PM. 

294 Transcript of he aring, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-1563). 

295 The information 
Volume III. 

TOP SECRET/, 

Page 59 of 499 



TC/LGL; to: [REDACTED]; cc: Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], 
j; subject: EYES ONLY; date: November 2002, at 03:13:01 PM. 

, HCTC/LGL; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

; subject: EYES ONLY; date: November 2002, at 04:27 



is described at length in the Committee Study in 

TNOFORN 




UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



COBALT included the use of interrupted sleep, loud music, and reduction in food quality and 
quantity. Less than a month after the death of Gul Rahman from suspected hypothermia, the 
plans also called for detainees’ clothes to be removed in a facility that was described to be 45 
degrees Fahrenheit. CIA Headquarters approved the proposals for these detainees, whom the 
CIA described as “Medium Value.” 296 



Prior to this, in November 2002, a delegation of several officers 
from the Federal Bureau of Prisons conducted an assessment of DETENTION SITE COBALT. 
Following the November |, 2002, through November 2002, visit, 297 CIA officers in Country 
| remarked that the Federal Bureau of Prisons assessments, along with recommendations and 
training, had “made a noticeable improvement on how the day to day operations at the facility 
are performed,” and made the detention site a “more secure and safer working environment for 

HSHHHHIHHHHHHHMRHhhh officers .” 298 

On December 4, 2002, officers at CIA Headquarters met with 
individuals from the Federal Bureau of Prisons to l earn more a bout their inspection of 
DETENTION SITE COBALT and their training of security staff. 299 During that 

meeting, the Federal Bureau of Prisons personnel described DETENTION SITE COBALT and 
stated that there was “absolutely no talking inside the facility,” that the guards do not interact 
with the prisoners, and that “[everything is done in silence and [in] the dark.” 300 According to a 
CIA officer, the Federal Bureau of Prisons staff also commented that “they were ‘WOW’ed’” at 
first by the facility, because: 



“They have never been in a facility where individuals are so sensory deprived, 
i.e., constant white noise, no talking, everyone in the dark, with the guards 
wearing a light on their head when they collected and escorted a detainee to an 
interrogation cell, detainees constantly being shackled to the wall or floor, and 
the starkness of each cell (concrete and bars). There is nothing like this in the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons. They then explained that they understood the 
mission and it was their collective assessment that in spite of all this sensory 
deprivation, the detainees were not being treated in humanely [sic]. They 
explained that the facility was sanitary, there was medical care and the guard 
force and our staff did not mistreat the detainee[s].” 301 



By the end of December 2002, the CIA Renditions Group that had 
visited DETENTION SITE COBALT had concluded that the detention facility’s initial “baseline 
conditions” involved so much deprivation that any further deprivation would have limited impact 



296 31118 DIRECTOR ■■ ■■■■ 

297 CIA detainee Gul Rahman died at DETENTION SITE COBALT at the end of the Federal Bureau of Prisons visit 



to the CIA detention site. 

298 [REDACTED] 30589 (271626Z NOV 02) 

299 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED]; subject: Meeting with SO & Federal Bureau of Prisons; date: December 4, 2002. 

300 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED]; subject: Meeting with SO & Federal Bureau of Prisons; date: December 4, 2002. 

301 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Meeting with SO & Federal Bureau of Prisons; date: 



December 5, 2002. 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 60 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 




on the interrogations. The team thus recommended that “experts and authorities other than the 
individuals who crafted the process” review the interrogation process and conditions, and that a 
legal review be conducted. 302 CIA Headquarters does not appear to have taken action on these 
recommendati ons . 

8. The CIA Places CIA Detainees in Country > | Facilities Because They Did Not Meet the 
MON Standard for Detention 

In the spring of 2003, the CIA continued to hold detainees at 
faciliti es in Country^ wh o were known not to meet the MON standard for detention. CIA 
officer [CIA OFFICER 1] described the arrangement he had with Country || 

officers in an email, writing: 




H. They also happen to have 3 or 4 rooms where they can lock up people 
discretely [sic]. I give them a few hundred bucks a month and they use the 
rooms for whoever I bring over - no questions asked. It is very useful for 
housing guys that shouldn’t be in [DETENTION SITE COBALT] for one 
reason or another but still need to be kept isolated and held in secret 
detention.” 303 

CIA cables indicate that CIA officers transferred at least four 
facilities because they did not meet the standard for CIA detention 

under the MON. 304 

In total, four CIA detention facilities were established in Country 
DETENTION SITE COB ALT h eld a total of 64 detainees during 
the period of its operation between September 2002 anc^^H2004, while DETENTION SITE 
GRAY held eight detainees between 2003 and 2003. The CIA later 

established two other CIA facilities inXJountr^B: DETENTION SITE ORANGE, which held 
34 detainees between |^^^004 and 2006; and DETENTION SITE BROWN, which 

held 12 detainees between^^^l 2006 and 2008. 305 



CIA records indicate that 



detainees to these Country | 



302 CIA document entitled Renditions Group Interrogation Team (RGIT), Baseline assessment for MVT, 
Detainee/Prisoner management, December 30, 2002. The CIA does not appear to have taken action on this 
recommendatio n. 

^^maiHrom^^^^^^^^^H [CIA OFFICER 1]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Thanks and Query re: List of 
(^^■■■^^I^HdFTAINEES; date: March 14, 2003. 

304 The cables did not explain any legal basis for detaini ng indiv iduals who did not meetthedetention^ 

of the September 17, 2001, MON. HEADQUARTERS HHHHHRBH 



36682®;;-' r' 


38836 ® 


5ISMM); HEADQUARTERS® 








H)Talec ■■ (■MMSlM 





305 See Volume III for additional information. 




Page 61 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



9. DCI Tenet Establishes First Guidelines on Detention Conditions and Interrogation; 
Formal Consolidation of Program Administration at CIA Headquarters Does Not 
Resolve Disagreements Among CIA Personnel 



(TO/^|^^^^||^H//NF) * atc J anu ary 2003, in response to the death of CIA detainee Gul 
Rahman and the use of a gun and a drill in the CIA interrogations of ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri 
(described later in this summary), DCI Tenet signed the first formal interrogation and 
confinement guidelines for the program. 306 In contrast to proposals from late 2001, when CIA 
personnel expected that any detention facility would have to meet U.S. prison standards, the 
confinement guidelines signed in January 2003 set forth minimal standards for a detention 
facility. The confinement guidelines required only that the facility be sufficient to meet basic 
health needs, meaning that even a facility like DETENTION SITE COBALT, in which detainees 
were kept shackled in complete darkness and isolation, with a bucket for human waste, and 
without notable heat during the winter months, met the standard. 307 

The guidelines also required quarterly assessments of the 
conditions at the detention facilities. The first quarterly review of detention facilities covered the 
period from January 2003 to April 2003, and examined conditions at DETENTION SITE 
COBALT, as well as at DETENTION SITE BLUE in a different country, Country |. 308 At that 
time, DETENTION SITE BLUE, which was initially designed for two detainees, was housing 
five detainees. Nonetheless, the site review team found that conditions at DETENTION SITE 
BLUE — including the three purpose-built “holding units’’ — met “the minimum standards set by 
the CIA” in the January 2003 guidance. Detainees received bi-weekly medical evaluations, 
brushed their teeth once a day, washed their hands prior to each meal, and could bathe once a 
week. Amenities such as solid food, clothing (sweatshirts, sweatpants, and slippers), reading 
materials, prayer rugs, and Korans were available depending on the detainee’s degree of 
cooperation with interrogators. 309 



(TN//||||^^^^^^|^/NF) The first quarter 2003 review also found that conditions at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT satisfied the January 2003 guidance, citing “significant 
improvements” such as space heaters and weekly medical evaluations. The review noted that a 
new facility was under construction in Country | to replace DETENTION SITE COBALT, and 
that this new detention facility, DETENTION SITE ORANGE, “will be a quantum leap 
forward” because “[it| will incorporate hcating/air conditioning, conventional plumbing, 
appropriate lighting, shower, and laundry facilities.” 310 DETENTION SITE ORANGE opened 
in 2004. Although some of the cells at DETENTION SITE ORANGE included plumbing, 



w> Guidelines on Interrogations Conducted Pursuant to the Presidential Memorandum of Notification of 17 
September 2001, signed by George Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence, January 28, 2003. 

,l)7 Guidelines on Interrogations Conducted Pursuant to the Presidential Memorandum of Notification of 17 
September 2001, signed by George Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence, January 28, 2003. 

708 CIA document titled. Quarterly Review of Confinement Conditions for CIA Detainees, 1/28/03 - 4/30/03, May 
22, 2003. 



,0 ' ) CIA document titled. Quarterly Review of Confinement Conditions for CIA Detainees, 1/28/03 - 4/30/03, May 
22, 2003. 



710 CIA document titled. Quarterly Review of Confinement Conditions for CIA Detainees, 1/28/03 - 4/30/03, May 
22, 2003. 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 62 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SE C RET // 



//NOFORN 



detainees undergoing interrogation were kept in smaller cells, with waste buckets rather than 
toilet facilities. 311 

(TS/^|H^^^|B//NE) The DCI’s January 2003 interrogation guidelines listed 12 
“enhanced techniques” that could be used with prior approval of the director of CTC, including 
two — use of diapers for “prolonged periods” and the abdominal slap — that had not been 
evaluated by the OLC. The “enhanced techniques” were only to be employed by “approved 
interrogators for use with [a] specific detainee.” The guidelines also identified “standard 
techniques” — including sleep deprivation up to 72 hours, reduced caloric intake, use of loud 
music, isolation, and the use of diapers “generally not to exceed 72 hours” — that required 
advance approval “whenever feasible,” and directed that their use be documented. The “standard 
techniques” were described as “techniques that do not incorporate physical or substantial 
psychological pressure.” The guidelines provided no description or further limitations on the use 
of either the enhanced or standard interrogation techniques. 312 

(T8//j|m^^^|^^E) Although the DCI interrogation guidelines were prepared as a 
reaction to the death of Gul Rahman and the use of unauthorized interrogation techniques on 
*Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, they did not reference all interrogation practices that had been 
employed at CIA detention sites. The guidelines, for example, did not address whether 
interrogation techniques such as the “rough take down,” 313 the use of cold water showers, 314 and 
prolonged light deprivation were prohibited. In addition, by requiring advance approval of 
“standard techniques” “whenever feasible,” the guidelines allowed CIA officers a significant 
amount of discretion to determine who could be subjected to the CIA’s “standard” interrogation 
techniques, when those techniques could be applied, and when it was not “feasible” to request 
advance approval from CIA Headquarters. Thus, consistent with the interrogation guidelines, 
throughout much of 2003, CIA officers (including personnel not trained in interrogation) could, 
at their discretion, strip a detainee naked, shackle him in the standing position for up to 72 hours, 
and douse the detainee repeatedly with cold water 315 — without approval from CIA Headquarters 
if those officers judged CIA Headquarters approval was not “feasible.” In practice, CIA 
personnel routinely applied these types of interrogation techniques without obtaining prior 
approval. 316 




312 Guidelines on Interrogations Conducted Pursuant to the Presidential Memorandum of Notification of 17 
September 2001 , signed by George Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence, January 28, 2003. 

313 For a des cription of the “rough takedown,” see Memorandum for Deputy Director of Operations, from HHI 

January 28, 2003, Subject: Death Investigation - Gul RAHMAN, pp. 21-22. 

3,4 One co ld water sh ower was described by a CIA linguist: “Rahman was placed back under the cold water by the 
guards at [CIA OFFICER l]]’s direction. Rahman was so cold that he could barely utter his alias. 

According to [the on-site linguist], the entire process lasted no more than 20 minutes. It was intended to lower 
Rahman’s resistance and was not for hygienic reasons. At the conclusion of the shower, Rahman was moved to one 
of the four sleep deprivation cells where he was left shivering for hours or overnightwitlHii^iand chained over his 
head.” See CIA Inspector General, Report of Investigation, Death of a Detainee (2003-7402-IG), 

April 27, 2005. 

315 Water dousing was not designated by the CIA as a “standard” interrogation technique until June 2003. In 
January 2004 water dousing was recategorized by the CIA as an “enhanced” interrogation technique. 

316 See Volume III for additional information. 



TOP - SECRE T // 



//NOFOR N 



Page 63 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



// NQFORN 



(TS^flHI^HTNE) The DCI interrogation guidelines also included the first 
requirements related to recordkeeping, instructing that, for “each interrogation session in which 
an enhanced technique is employed,” the field prepare a “substantially contemporaneous 
record... setting forth the nature and duration of each such technique employed, the identities of 
those present, and a citation to the required Headquarters approval cable.” 317 In practice, these 
guidelines were not followed. 318 



(TS/^Hm^^Ql/NE) There were also administrative changes to the program. As noted, 
on December 3, 2002, CTC’s Renditions Group formally assumed responsibility for the 
management and maintenance of all CIA detention and interrogation facilities. 319 Prior to that 
time^h^nterrogation program was “joined at the hip” with CTC’s ALEC Station, according to 
iHHMc T C Legal, although another CTC attorney who was directly involved in the 
program informed the CIA OIG that she “was never sure what group in CTC was responsible for 
interrogation activities.” 320 Even after the formal designation of the CIA’s Renditions Group, 321 
tensions continued, particularly between CTC personnel who supported S WIGERT and 
DUNBAR’s continued role, and the Renditions Group, which designated as the 



317 



DIRECTOR 



(302126Z JAN 03); DIRECTOR 



(31 1702Z JAN 03). Despite the formal record 



keeping requirement, the CIA’s June 2013 Response argues that detailed reporting on the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques at CIA detention sites was not necessary, stating: “First, the decline in reporting over time 
on the use of enhanced techniques, which the Study characterizes as poor or deceptive record keeping, actually 
reflects the maturation of the program. In early 2003, a process was put in place whereby interrogators requested 
permission in advance for interrogation plans. The use of these plans for each detainee obviated the need for 
reporting in extensive detail on the use of specific techniques, unless there were deviations from the approved plan.” 
As detailed in the Study, the process put in place by the CIA in early 2003 explicitly required record keeping, 
including “the nature and duration of each such technique employed, the identities of those present, and a citation to 
the required Headquarters approval cable.” That requirement was never revised. 

318 Subsequent to the January 2003 guidance, many cables reporting the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques listed the techniques used on a particular day, but did not describe the frequency with which those 
techniques were employed, nor did they integrate the specific techniques into narratives of the interrogations. As the 
CIA interrogation program continued, descriptions of the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were 
recorded in increasingly summarized form, providing little information on how or when the techniques were applied 
during an interrogation. There are also few CIA records detailing the rendition process for detainees and their 
transportation to or between detention sites. CIA records do include detainee comments on their rendition 
experiences and photographs of detainees in the process of being transported. Based on a review of the 
photographs, detainees transported by the CIA by aircraft were typically hooded with their hands and feet shackled. 
The detainees wore large headsets to eliminate their ability to hear, and these headsets were typically affixed to a 
detainee’s head with duct tape that ran the circumference of the detainee’s head. CIA detainees were placed in 
diapers and not permitted to use the lavatory on the aircraft. Depending on the aircraft, detainees were either 
strapped into seats during the flights, or laid down and strapped to the floor of the plane horizontally like cargo. See 
CIA photographs of renditions among CIA materials provided to the Committee pursuant to the Committee’s 
document requests, as well as CIA detainee reviews in Volume III for additional information on the transport of CIA 

detainees. 

319 DIRECTOR ■■^032336ZDEC 03) 

320 Interview of HIHHIIH’ [REDACTEDjUREDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector 

General, August 20, 2003. Interview of by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the 

Inspector General, February 14, 2003. CTC Chief of Operations told the Inspector Ge neral that the program was 
handled by the Abu Zubaydah Task Force. See February II, 2003, interview report of Office 

of the Inspector General. 

321 As noted, the CIA’s Rendition Group is variably known as the “Renditions Group,” the “Renditions and 

Detainees Group,” the “Renditions, DetentionSjancUnterro^ the initials, “RDI” and “RDG.” 

Page 64 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



CIA’s chief interrogator. 322 As late as June 2003, SWIGERT and DUNBAR, operating outside 
of the direct management of the Renditions Group, were deployed to DETENTION SITE BLUE 
to both interrogate and conduct psychological reviews of detainees. 323 The dispute extended to 
interrogation practices. The Rendition s Group’s leadership considered the waterboard, which 
Chief of Interrogations was not certified to use, as “life threatening,” and 

complained to the OIG that some CIA officers in the Directorate of Operations believed that, as a 
result, the Renditions Group was “running a ‘sissified’ interro gation pr ogram.” 324 At the same 
time, CIA CTC personnel criticized the Renditions Group andJHB for their use of painful 
stress positions, as well as for the conditions at DETENTION SITE COBALT. 325 

There were also concerns about possible conflicts of interest 
related to the contractors, SWIGERT and DUNBAR. On January 30, 2003, a cable from CIA 
Headquarters stated that “the individual at the interrogation site who administers the techniques 
is not the same person who issues the psychological assessment of record,” and that only a staff 
psychologist, not a contractor, could issue an assessment of record.” 326 In June 2003, however, 
SWIGERT and DUNBAR were deployed to DETENTION SITE BLUE to interrogate KSM, as 
well as to assess KSM’s “psychological stability” and “resistance posture.” 327 As described later 
in this summary, the contractors had earlier subjected KSM to the waterboard and other CIA 
enhanced interrogation techniques. The decision to send the contract psychologists to 
DETENTION SITE BLUE prompted an OMS psychologist to write to OMS leadership that 



322 Interview of by [REDACTEDUjncURED ACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 

3, 2003. February 21, 2003, interview report, Office of the Inspector General. Hammond 

DUNBAR told the Office of Inspector General that there was “intrigue” between the RDG and him and SWIGERT, 
and “there were emails coming to [DETENTION SITE BLUE] that questioned [his] and [SWIGERT]’ s 
qualifications.” See Interview of Hammond DUNBAR, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the 
Inspector Gene ral, February 4, 2003. 

323 Email from: 

subject: Re: ^^BRDG Taski ng for IC Psychologists 

[DUNBAR] and [SWIGERT]; date: June 20, 2003, at 5:23:29 expressed concern that “no 

professional in the field would credit [SWIGERT and D UNBAR’sl later j udg ments as psychologists ass essing the 
subjects of their enhanced m e asures.” ( See email from: 

; subject: Re: |^|RDG 

Tasking for 1C Psychologists DUNBAR and SWIGERT; date: June 20, 2003, at 2:19:53 PM.) The CIA’s June 2013 
Response states that CIA “Headquarters established CTC's Renditions and Detentions Group CTC/RDG as the 
responsible entity for all CIA detention and interrogation sites in December 2002, removing any latent institutional 
confusion.” ^ 

324 Interview of by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 

February 21, 2003. The chief of interrogations, told the Inspector General that the waterboar d was 

overused with Abu Zubaydah and KSM and was ineffective in the interrogations of KSM. ( See Interview of |H 
mm by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED] of the Office of the Inspector General, Marcl^^, 2003.) One doctor 
involved in CIA interrogations using the waterboard interrogation technique stated that “has a huge bias 

against the waterboard b/c he’s not approved to use it. The reverse is tru^nhc^ontrac^sy guy^SWIGERT^nd 
DUNBAR] who have a vested interest in favor of it.” See email from: ||||||||||H||||i||; to: 

cc: [REDACTED]; subject: re: More; date^prim^003, at 08:1 1 :07 AM. 

325 March 10, 2 003, interview report of Office of the Inspector General. Interview of HSfi 

HM^^B^by[REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, February 27, 2003. Interview 
ofH^HHH by [R EDACTED] a nd [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 3, 2003. March 
24, 2003, interv iew repo rt of Office of the Inspector General. 

326 DIRECTO R ■■ (301835Z JAN 03) 

327 12168 (301822Z JUN 03) 



Page 65 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



“[a]ny data collected by them from detai nees with who m they previously interacted as 
interrogators will always be suspect.” 328 then informed the management of 

the Renditions Group that “no professional in the field would credit [SWIGERT and 
DUNBAR’s] later judgments as psychologists assessing the subjects of their enhanced 
measures.” 329 At the end of their deployment, in June 2003, SWIGERT and DUNBAR provided 
their assessment of KSM and recommended that he should be evaluated on a monthly basis by 
“an experienced interrogator known to him” who would assess how forthcoming he is and 
“remind him that there are differing consequences for c ooperating or not cooperating.” 330 In his 
response to the draft Inspector General Special Review, noted that “OMS 

concerns about conflict of interest... were nowhere more graphic than in the setting in which the 
same individuals applied an EIT which only they were approved to employ, judged both its 
effectiveness and detainee resilience, and implicitly proposed continued use of the technique - at 
a daily compensation reported to be $1800/day, or four times that of interrogators who could not 
use the technique.” 331 

D. The Detention and Interrogation of ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri 

1. CIA Interrogators Disagree with CIA Headquarters About Al-Nashiri’ s Level of 

Cooperation; Interrogators Oppose Continued Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques 



i") ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, 332 assessed by the CIA to be an al- 
Qa’ida “terrorist operations planner” who was “intimately involved” in planning both the USS 
Cole bombing and the 1998 East Africa U.S. Embassy bombings, was captured in the United 
Arab Emirates in mid-October 2002. 333 He provided information while in the custody of a 
foreign government, including on plotting in the Persian Gulf, 334 and was then rendered by the 



328 The email, which expressed concern that SWIGERT and DUNBAR would interfere with on-site psychologists, 
stated that, “[although these guys believe that their way is the only way, there should be an effort to define roles and 
responsibilitie^efor^h^- arroganc^n^iarcissisn^volv^ntounproductive con flict in the field.” See email 
from: to: subject: ^ij^DG 

Psychologists DUNBA^n^WIGERT^late^un^6^003, a t 4:54 :32 PM. 
horn: HBHI: to: 

|; subject: ReijURDG Tasking for IC Psychologists DUNBAR and 
SWIGERTdate: June 20, 2003, at 2:19:53 PM. 

330 pim 12168 (301822Z JUN 03). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “In practice, by April 2003, [CIA] 
staff psychologists had taken over almost all of the provisions of support to the RDI program. As it concerned 
[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR], however, the appearance of impropriety continued, albeit to a lesser degree, because 
they were occasionally asked to provide input to assessments on detainees whom they had not interrogated” 
(emphasis added). The CIA’s June 2013 Response is inaccurate. For example, in June 2003, SWIGERT and 
DUNBAR provided an assessment on KSM, a detainee whom they had interrogated. 

331 Memorandum for Inspector General, Atten tion: As sistant IG for Investigations, [REDACTED], from 
[REDACTED], M.D., mMedical Services 



re Draft Special Review-Counterterrorism Detention and 

Interrogation Program (2003-7 123-IG), at 13. 

332 For m ore information on al-Nashiri , see detainee review of ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri in Volume III. 

333 ALEC 11357 (021242Z DEC 

36726 | 

; from al-Nashiri while he was in foreign government custody, see 

Page 66 of 499 



334 See ■■■36595 
For disseminated intelligence, see 







For other reporting 

TOP - SE G RET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



//NOF O RN 



CI A to DETENTION SITE COBALT in Country | on November 2002, where he was held 
for days before being transferred to DETENTION SITE GREEN on November 2002. 335 

At DETENTION SITE GREEN, al-Nashiri was interrogated using the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, including being subjected to the waterboard at least three times. 336 In 
December 2002, when DETENTION SITE GREEN was closed, al-Nashiri and Abu Zubaydah 
were rendered to DETENTION SITE BLUE. 337 



I* 1 tota L al-Nashiri was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques during at least four separate periods, with each period typically ending 
with an assessment from on-site interrogators that al-Nashiri was compliant and cooperative. 338 
Officers at CIA Headquarter s disagreed with these assessments, with the deputy chief of ALEC 
Station, HHHIUft commenting that DETENTION SITE BLUE interrogators should 
not make “sweeping statements” in cable traffic regarding al-Nashiri’ s compliance. 339 Officers 
at CIA Headquarters sought to reinstate the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
based on their belief that al-Nashiri had not yet provided actionable intelligence on imminent 
attacks. 340 



Shortly after al-Nashiri arrived at DETENTION SITE BLUE, CIA 
interrogators at the detention site judged al-Nashiri’ s cooperation and compliance by his 
engagement and willingness to answer questions, while CIA Headquarters personnel judged his 
compliance based on the specific actionable intelligence he had provided (or the lack thereof). 
For example, in December 2002, interrogators informed CIA Headquarters that al-Nashiri was 
“cooperative and truthful,” and that the “consensus” at the detention site was that al-Nashiri was 



70866 

For disseminated intelligence, see 




335 



29768 

11246 



336 See , for examp le, 

11263 ^MH N OV02)^^^^M 112701 
1 129 4 B^M|nQV02); | 

02); 1 1 352^^M DEC 02); j 



pOV02)T^^^Bll243 (I 
■NOV 0 2)~^^^M 1 1258^^8 

MM no vo2)MBM^12Mj 

^^^3 MH|NOV02)[^M 

lll359^MH DEC 02)1 



[NOV 02) 

NOV 0 2); 

NOV 02); 

|1 1322 H^M NOV 
111322 



NOV 02); 

337 




1 1 344^^M NOV 02). 

78275 ( J^MdEC 02) 

338 Al-Nashiri’s time at DETENTION SITE COBALT is not well documented in CIA records. As described 

elsewhere, standard operating procedure at COBALT at the time included total light deprivation, loud continuous 
music, isolation, and dietary manipulation. Based on CIA records, the other four “enhanced interrogation” periods 
of al-Nashiri took place at DETENTION SITE BLUE on December 5-8, 2002; December 27, 2002 - January 1 , 
2003; January 9-10, 2003; and January 15-27, 2003. 5ecMHHL22^° (1 115412 DEC 02); ^^M 10078 
(211733Z DEC 02)MlMl0140 (03m7ZJAf^r^ (191 729Z JAN 03). 

339 Email from : to: MMMM [REDACTED]; cc: M^^HK 

MHM> [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: [DETENTION SITE BLUE] follow-up; date: December 15, 
2002 . _ 

340 See, for example, ALEC HM (07231 5Z DEC 02); ALEC ^M(130352Z DEC 02); ALEC 

(1 80247Z DEC 02); ALEC |^BH091729Z J AN 03); CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation: 
Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques at [DETENTION SITE BLUE], (2003-7123-IG), October 29, 2003. See 
also CIA Office of Inspector General report, Counterterrorism Detention And Interrogation Activities (September 
2001 - October 2003) (2003-7123-IG), rel eased on May 7, 2004. 

mi ii iii i HIM 

Page 67 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NOFORN 



“a compliant detainee” who was not “withholding important threat information.” 341 Officers 
from the CIA’s ALEC Station at CIA Headquarters responded: 

“it is inconceivable to us that al-Nashiri cannot provide us concrete leads.... 

When we are able to capture other terrorists based on his leads and to thwart 
future plots based on his reporting, we will have much more confidence that he 
is, indeed, genuinely cooperative on some level.” 342 

Later, after multiple follow-up debriefings, DETENTION SITE 
BLUE officers again wrote that they had “reluctantly concluded” that al-Nashiri was providing 
“logical and rational explanations” to questions provided by CIA Headquarters and therefore 
they recommended “against resuming enhanced measures” unless ALEC Station had evidence 
al-Nashiri was lying. 343 A cable from the detention site stated: 

“without tangible proof of lying or intentional withholding, however, we 
believe employing enhanced measures will accomplish nothing except show 
[al-Nashiri] that he will be punished whether he cooperates or not, thus eroding 
any remaining desire to continue cooperating.... [The] bottom line is that we 
think [al-Nashiri] is being cooperative, and if subjected to indiscriminate and 
prolonged enhanced measures, there is a good chance he will either fold up and 
cease cooperation, or suffer the sort of permanent mental harm prohibited by 
the statute. Therefore, a decision to resume enhanced measures must be 
grounded in fact and not general feelings.” 344 

2. CIA Headquarters Sends Untrained Interrogator to Resume Al-Nashiri ’ s Interrogations; 

Interrogator Threatens al-Nashiri with a Gun and a Drill 

After the DETENTION SITE BLUE chief of Base sent two 
interrogators back to the United States because of “prolonged absences from family” and the 
“fecUha^nhanced measures are no longer re quire d for al-Nashiri,” CIA Headquarters sent 

[CIA OFFICER 2], a CIA officer who had not been trained or qualified 
as an interrogator, to DETENTION SITE BLUE to question and assess al-Nashiri. 345 




10030 (111541Z DEC 02) 
(180247Z DEC 02) 

10085 (230906Z DEC 02) 

10085 (230906Z DEC 02) 

10040 (122122Z DE C 02). Prior t o 
included numerous concerns about BllliSij 



[CIA OFFICER 2’s] deployment, CIA records 



[CIA OFFICER 2’s] anger management, 



For more information on 



[CIA OFFICER 2] and other CIA personnel in the 
progr am with similar alarming issues in their backgrou nd, see Volu me III. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states 
that: 

some of the | officers mentioned in the Study— have been 
excluded— n^ information was not in fact available to senior managers making assignments | 

Notwithstanding the C IA’s June 2013 assertion, as detailed in Volume HI, senior 
[CIA OFFICER 2] prior to his deployment. 

//NOFORN 

Page 68 of 499 



managers were aware of concerns related to] 

TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ / 



//N Q FORN 



In late December 2002, following a meeting at CIA Headquarters 
to discuss resuming th e use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against al-Nashiri, 

the chief of RDG 346 — theentitythat managed the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program — objected to sending I^HHi [CIA OFFICER 2 ] to the deten tion site 
because he “had not been through the interro gation training” and because “had 

heard from some colleagues that [H||H^^[CI^OFFICER 2]] was too confident, had a 
temper, and had some sec urity issuesT’^^^B^^B later learned from other CIA officials that 
“[CTC chief of operations [CIA OFFICER 2]] at 

[DETENTION SITE BLUE] over the holidays.” ■iHHtoldthe Office of Inspector 
General that “his assessment is that the Agency management felt that the [RDG] interrogators 
were being too lenient with al-Nashiri and that [HHH [CIA OFFICER 2]] was sent to 
[DETENTION SITE BLUE] to ‘fix’ the situation.” 347 

■■ [CIA OFFICER 2] arrived at DETENTION SITE 
BLUEonl5ecemberB|, 2002, and the CIA resumed the use of its enhance d interrogation 
techniques on al-Nashiri shortly thereafter, despite the fact that [CIA OFFICER 2] 

had not bee n trained, certified, or approved to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

[CIA OFFICER 2] wrote in a cable to CIA Headquarters that “[al]-Nashiri responds 
well to harsh treatment” and suggested that the interrogators continue to administer “various 
degrees of mild punishment,” but still allow for “a small degree of ‘hope,’ by introducing some 
‘minute rewards.’” 348 

If was later learned that during these interrogation sessions, 
l^mi^CI^O^ICER 2], with the permission and participation of the DETENTION SITE 
BLUE chief of Base, who also had not been trained and qualified as an interrogato^ised a series 
of unauthorized interrogation techniques against al-Nashiri. For example, [CIA 

OFFICER 2] placed al-Nashiri in a “standing stress position” with “his hands affixed over his 
head” for approximately two and a hal^laysL^MLater, during the course of al-Nashiri’ s 
debriefings, while he was blindfolded, m [CIA OFFICER 2] placed a pistol near al- 
Nashiri’ s head and operated a cordless drill near al-Nashiri’ s body. 350 Al-Nashiri did not provide 
any additional threat information during, or after, these interrogations. 351 



346 As described, the “Renditions and Interrogations Group,” is also referred to as the “Renditions Group,” the 
“Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Group,” “RDI,” and “RDG” in CIA records. 

347 Interview Report, 2003-71 23-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, 

February 23, 2003. 

348 



1014 0 (031727Z JAN 03) 
349 See email from: 



|; subject: EYES ONLY - [| 



I] ONLY 



- MEMORANDUM FOR ADDO/DDO; date: January 22, 2003. In an April 12, 2007, Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence hearing, Senator Carl Levin asked the CIA Director if the CIA disputed allegations in an International 
Committee of the Red Cross report that suggested CIA detainees were placed in “[p]rolonged stress standing 
position, naked, arm[s] chained above the head....” The CIA Director responded, “Not above the head. Stress 
positions are part of the EITs, and nakedness were part of the EITs, Senator.” See Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence Hearing Transcript, dated April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

350 See, for example, CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation: Unauthorized Interrogation 
Techniques at [DETENTION SITE BLUE], (2003-7123-IG), October 29, 2003; email from: [DETENTION SITE 



BLUE] COB 



|; subject: EYES ONLY - 



I] ONLY - 



MEMO FOR ADDO/DDO; date: January 22, 2003. 

351 For additional details, see Volume III. 

TOP SECRE T^ 

Page 69 of 499 



//NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Based on a report from CTC, the CIA Office of Inspector General 
conducted a review of these interrogation incidents, and issued a report of investigation in the 
fall of 2003. 352 The Office of Inspector General later described additional allegations of 
unauthorized techniques used against al-Nashiri by [CIA OFFICER 2] and other 

interrogators, including slapping al-Nashiri multiple times on the back of the head during 
interrogations; implying that his mother would be brought before him and sexually abused; 
blowing cigar smoke in al-Nashiri’ s face; giving al-Nashiri a forced bath using a stiff brush; and 
using improvised stress positions that caused cuts and bruises resulting in the intervention of a 
medical officer, who was concerned that al-Nashiri’s shoulders would be dislocated using the 
stress positions. 353 When interviewed by the Office of Inspector General, the DETENTION 
SITE BLUE chief of Bas^tated he did not object to using the gun and drill in the interrogations 
because he believed ^|^H| [CIA OFFICER 2] was sent from CIA Headquarters “to resolve 
the matter of al-Nashiri’s cooperation” and that he believed [CIA OFFICER 2] had 

permission to use the interrogation techniques. 354 The chief of Base added that his own on-site 
approval was based on this and “the pressure he felt from Headquarte rs to obtain imminent threat 
information from al-Nashiri on 9/1 1 -style attacks.” 355 In April 2004, HBH ^IA OFFICER 
2] and the chief of Base were disciplined. 356 

3. CIA Contractor Recommends Continued Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 

Techniques Against Al-Nashiri; Chief Interrogator Threatens to Quit Because Additional 
Techniques Might “Push [Al-Nashiri] Over The Edge Psychologically, ” Refers to the 
CIA Program As a “ Train Wreak [sic] Waiting to Happen ” 



352 CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation: Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques at 
[DETENTION SITE BLUE], (2003-7 123-IG), October 29, 2003. 

333 CIA Office of Inspector General, Special Review - Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program, 
(2003-7 123-IG), May 2004. 

354 CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation: Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques at 
[DETENTION SITE BLUE], (2003-7 123-IG), October 29, 2003. 

355 CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation: Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques at 
[DETENTION SITE BLUE], (2003-7 123-IG), October 29, 2003. 

3 6 ■■■ [CIA OFFICER 2] received a one-year Letter of Reprimand, was suspended for five days without pay, 
and was prohibited from promotions, within-grade step increases, quality step i ncreases, or permanent salary 
increases during that one-year period. The decision did not affect flHHHI [CIA OFFICER 2’s] eligibility to 
receive Exceptional Performance Awards, b o nuses, or non-monetary forms of recognition. See \ 

[CIA OFFI CER 2] retired from the CIA on 2004. ( See 

I) On 

June 20, 2005, the CIA directorof transnational issues, aware of [CIA OFFICER 2’s] problematic 

background, approved [CIA OFFICER 2’s] employment on a CIA contract because the protect was 

“mission critical” and “no other contractor with the needed skills was available.” 



Reprimand and a ten-day suspension wit hout 
CIA during the period of reprimand. On 
individual retired from the CIA. See 



The chief of Base received a two-year Letter of 
ja^and was prohibited from receiving any bonus awards from the 
| 2003, prio r to the implementation of the prohibitions, this 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 70 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



//NOF O R N 



On January 2003, CIA contractor DUNBAR arrived at 
DETENTION SITE BLUE to conduct a “Psychological Interrogation Assessment” to judge al- 
Nashiri’s suitability for the additional use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and 
develop recommendations for his interrogation. The resulting interrogation plan proposed that 
the interrogators would have the “latitude to use the full range of enhanced exploitation and 
interrogation measures,” adding that “the use of the water board would require additional support 
from” fellow CIA contractor Grayson SWIGERT. According to the interrogation plan, once the 
interrogators had eliminated al-Nashiri’s “sense of control and predictability” and established a 
“desired level of helplessness,” they would reduce the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques and transition to a debriefing phase once again. 357 



(TS/^iB^|^^^^K/NF)After receiving the proposed interrogation plan for al-Nashiri on 
JanuaryTL20037^HHHH|, the CIA’s chief of interrogations — whose presence had 
previously prompted al-Nashiri to tremble in fear 358 — emailed CIA colleagues to notify them that 
he had “informed the front office of CTC” that he would “no longer be associated in any way 
with the interrogation program due to serious reservation[s] [he hadjaboutthe current state of 
affairs” and would instead be “retiring shortly.” In the same email, wrote, “[t]his is a 

train wre ak [sic] waiting to happen and I intend to get the hell off the train before it happens.” 359 
drafted a cable for CIA Headquarters to send to DETENTION SITE BLUE raising a 
number of concerns that he, the chief of interrogations, believed should be “entered for the 
record.” The CIA Headquarters cable — which does not appear to have been disseminated to 
DETENTION SITE BLUE— included the following: 



“we have serious reservations with the continued use of enhanced techniques 
with [al-Nashiri] and its long term impact on him. [Al-Nashiri] has been held 
for three months in very difficult conditions, both physically and mentally. It 
is the assessment of the prior interrogators that [al-Nashiri] has been mainly 
truthful and is not withholding significant information. To continue to use 
enhanced techniquefs] without clear indications that he [is] withholding 
important info is excessive and may cause him to cease cooperation on any 
level. [Al-Nashiri] may come to the conclusion that whether he cooperates or 
not, he will continually be subjected to enhanced techniques, therefore, what is 
the in centive for continued cooperation. Also, both C/CTC/RG [C hief of CTC 
RDG and HVT Interrogator [|^H^IH] who 

departed [DETENTION SITE BLUE] in jjflanuary, believe continued 
enhanced methods may push [al-Nashiri] over the edge psychologically.” 360 



357 



10267 



358 According to a December 12, 2002, CIA cable, al-Nashiri “visibly and markedly trembles with fear every time he 



sees • ” See 

359 Email from 
Despite this not ification, 

360 Email from 




1 0038 (1221 19Z DE C 02). 

; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: date: January 22, 2003. 
did not imme diately resign fr om the interrogation program. 

I, [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; su bject: CONCER NS OVER REVISED INTERROGATION PLAN FOR 
NASHIRI; date: January 22, 2003. 
of interrogations. 

TOP SECRE T/ 

Page 7 1 of 499 



, referenced in the passage as a “HVT Interrogator,” was the chief 

/NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



fl NOFORN 



The draft cable from HH also raised “conflict of 
responsibility” concerns, stating: 



“Another area of concern is the use of the psychologist as an interrogator. The 
role of the ops psychologist is to be a detached observer and serve as a check 
on the interrogator to prevent the interrogator from any unintentional excess of 
pressure which might cause permanent psychological harm to the subject. The 
medical officer is on hand to provide the same protection from physical actions 
that might harm the subject. Therefore, the medical officer and the 
psychologist should not serve as an interrogator, which is a conflict of 
responsibility. We note that [th^ropose^plan] contains a psychological 
interrogation assessment by psychologist [DUNBAR] which 

is to be carried out by interrogator [DUNBAR]. We have a problem with him 
conducting both roles simultaneously.” 361 



Rather than releasing the cable that was drafted by CIA 

Headquarters approved a plan to reinstitute the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques against al-Nashiri, beginning with shaving him, removing his clothing, and placing 
him in a standing sleep deprivation position with his arms affixed over his head. 362 CIA cables 
describing subsequent interrogations indicate that al-Nashiri was nude and, at times, “put in the 
standing position, handcuffed and shackled.” 363 According to cables, CIA interrogators decided 
to provide al-Nashiri clothes to “hopefully stabilize his physiological symptoms and prevent 
them from deteriorating,” 364 noting in a cable the next day that al-Nashiri was suffering from a 
head cold which caused his body to shake for approximately ten minutes during an 
interrogation. 365 



Beginning in June 2003, the CIA transferred al-Nashiri to five 
different CIA detention facilities before he was transferred to U.S. military custody on 
September 5, 2006. 366 In the interim, he was diagnosed by some CIA psychologists as having 
“anxiety” and “major depressive” disorder, 367 while others found no symptoms of either 
illness. 368 He was a difficult and uncooperative detainee and engaged in repeated belligerent 
acts, including attempts to assault CIA detention site personnel and efforts to damage items in his 



361 Email from: BBHH; to: [REDACTED], | 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: CONCERNS OVER REVISED INTERROGATION PLAN FOR 
NASHIRI; date: January 22, 2003. As noted above, personnel from CIA’s Office of Medical Services raised the 
same concerns about medical and psychological personnel serving both to assess the health of a detainee and to 

participate in th e interro gation process. 

DIRECTOR BH (230008Z J AN 03) 

10296 (25 111 3Z JAN 03), ||^B 10306 (261403Z JAN 03) 




362 DIRECTO R (20 1659Z JAN 03 

363 ■ 10289 (241203Z JAN 03); 

10309 (261403Z JAN 03) 

10312 (270854ZJ AN 03) 

(031945Z SEP 06); 



366 HEADQUARTERS 
(051613Z SEP 06) 

367 See, for example, 
2038 (211558Z JAN 



1242 (050744Z SEP 06); HEADQUARTERS 





11247 ( 14132 1Z APR 03); 

2169 (25U33Z MAR 05); 

1756 (190800 Z SEP 03). 

(021841Z AUG 04); ■■■ 2709 (271517Z APR 06); 
(271517Z APR 06) 



1959 (111700Z DEC 04); | 
11701 (191640Z MAY 03); 



3910 (241 852Z JAN 06); 



TOP SECRET// 



/7 NQFORN 



Page 72 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



fj^rn n/'A'i Pj 



iim 



nf*i 



Bill 






wiiim 



1356 (011644Z JUL 04); 



1962(1 2 1029Z DEC 04); 



2038 (211558ZJAN05)j^^^^PI^^^H 1091 (031835Z NOV 03); 

12 66 (052309Z JAN 04); ■j||^|H|^^K63T(271440Z MAR 04). 

371 1203 (231709ZMAY04)TBHHHI 1202 (231644Z MAY 04) 

372 ■■ 1843 (271356Z OCT 04). In the final years of al-Nashiri’s detention, most of the intelligence 
requirements for al-Nashiri involved showing al-Nashiri photographs. In June 2005, the DETENTION SITE 
BLACK chief of Base suspended even these debriefings because it was “the very, very rare moment” that al-Nashiri 
would recogn ize a photograph, and because the debriefings often were the “catalyst” for his outbursts. See 
■■■■I 2474 (25 1 622Z JUN 05). 

373 While still in the custody of a foreign government, prior to his rendition to CIA custody, al-Nashiri provided 
details on multiple terrorist plots in which he was involved prior to his detention, including the attacks against the 
USS Cole and the MV Limburg, plans to sink oil tankers in the Strait of Hormuz, plans to attack warships docked at 
ports in Dubai and J eddah, an d his c asing of a Dubai am usement park. Thisinfomiati^ dissenrinatecHn 

reports: 1H 36595 36726 ALEC j^HH 



For disseminated intelligence, see 

C 

Cl A|^m For other reporting from al-Nashiri while he was in the 

custody of a foreign government, 



70870^^HHHI^HHP For disseminated 



intelligen ce, see 
374 ALEC 



i irii dN nrSi u ! 



Page 73 of 499 

UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET / / 



A NOFQRN 



“risking that he hear of this initiative” from Country | officials. 375 As was the ease in other host 
countries, the ambassador in Country | was told by the CIA not to speak with any other State 
Department official about the arrangement. 376 

(TSA^^^^^(^^M//NF^>rio^othc opening of the CIA detention facility in Country |, | 
|CTC Legal, warned of possible legal actions against CIA 

employees in countries that “take a different view of the detention and interrogation practices 
employed by [th^'I^/^MTndrthctj'ccommci^ CIA facilities 

in countries t hat 

fs advice was not heeded and, in December 2002, the two individuals then being 
detained by the CIA in Country | (Abu Zubaydah and ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri) were 
transferred to Country |. 379 



(TSA 



: ) The agreement to host a CIA detention facility in Coui^^^^ 



created multiple, ongoing difficulties between Country | and the CIA. Country |’s| 

| proposed a written “Me morandum of Und erstanding” covering the relative roles and 
responsibilities of the CIA and which the CIA ultimately refused to sign. 380 

Fo ur months after the detenti on site began hosting CIA detainees. Country | rejected the transfer 

which included Khalid Shaykh Muhammad. The decision was 
reversed only after the U.S. ambassador intervened with the political leadership of Country | on 
the CIA's behalf. 381 The following montjMh^Cl^^ovidcd | million to CountryB’s 

f XJ after which officials, speaking for and the 

Country | political leadership, indicated that Country | was now flexible with regard to the 
number of CIA detainees at the facility and when the facility would eventually be closed. 383 The 
facility, which was dcscribctHw the Cl A as “over capacity,” was nonetheless closed, as had been 
previously agreed, in |thc fall of] 2003. 384 

According to CIA cables, years later, officials in 

|| Country || officials were “extremely upset” 386 at the 
CIA’s inability to keep secrets and were “deeply disappointed” in not having had more warning 





be redacted in the Committee Study prior to the Study 



375 1 RHP ACTE D] 8420 0 

376 DIRECTOR 

377 ■■■ 10640 
178 The CIA insisted 

beingrelocatedtothe U.S. Senate fro m the off-site research facility. 

379 ■■■^1 7S275j^^H.DEC 02) 

380 [REDACTED | 1888 

381 [REDACTED | 2666 

382 HEADQUARTERS) 

383 [REDACTED | 3280 According to the cable, the CIA Station speculated that the change of 

position was “at least somewhat attributable... to our gift of million....” 

384 See Volume 1 for additional details. 

383 [REDACTED) 7326 ([ REDACTED | | REDACTED |) 

386 [REDACTED] 7849 ([REDACTED] [ REDACTED!) 

i nr 1 1 ( in i Mill mu 

Page 74 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



of President Bush’s September 2006publi^cknowledgmentof^ program. 387 The CIA 
Station, for its part, described the ||H|^HHIHIIIi^HIIIIHHii as a “serious blow” to the 
bilateral relationship. 388 

F. The Detention and Interrogation of Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh 

I. Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh Provides Information While in Foreign Government Custody, Prior 
to Rendition to CIA Custody 

) As early as September 15, 2001, Ramzi bin al-Shibh was assessed 
by the CIA to be a facilitator for the September 11, 2001, att acks and an associate of the 9/1 1 
hijackers. 389 While targeting another terrorist, Hassan Ghul, Pakistani officials 

unexpectedly captured bin al-Shibh during raids in Pakistan on Septemberll i 2002. 390 On 
September 2002, bin al-Shibh was rendered to a foreign government, 

Approxim ately five m onths later, on February |, 2003, bin al-Shibh was rendered from the 
custody ofHHto CIA custody, becoming the 41 st CIA detainee. 392 

) As with Abu Zubaydah and ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, personnel at 
CIA Headquarters — often in ALEC Station — overestimated the information bin al-Shibh would 
have access to within al-Qa’ida, writing that bin al-Shibh “likely has critical information on 
upcoming attacks and locations of senior al-Qa’ida operatives.” 393 Later, after bin al-Shibh was 
interrogated using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques for an estimated 34 days, the 
CIA’s ALEC Station concluded that bin al-Shibh was not a senior member of al-Qa’ida and was 
not in a position to know details about al-Qa’ida’ s plans for future attacks. 394 In another parallel, 
officers at CIA Headquarters requested and directed the continued use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against bin al-Shibh when CIA detention site personnel recommended 
ending such measures. 395 



387 [REDACTED] 9210 (231043Z SEP 06) 

388 [REDACTED] 7839 ([REDACTED]). Email from: [REDACTED]; to [REDACTED]; subject: BOMBSHELL; 

date: [REDACTED]. Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: CIA Prisons in 
[ Country I]; date: [RE DACTED]. Email from: [RE DACTED]; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: 1 think 
dBHiHHB had to react [ REDACT ED], date: [REDACTED]. 

38 ^ALEC^^^H(2223 34Z SEP 01); ^Bfc2557 (15SEP 01) 

390 ALEC ^B (292345Z AUG 02)|aLEc|BBB (11 155 1Z SEP 02). The CIA represented to policymakers 
and others — inaccurately — that “as a result of the use of EITs” Abu Zubaydah provided information on Ramzi bin 
al-Shibh that played a “key role in the ultimate capture of Ramzi Bin al-Shibh.” See section of this summary on the 
“Captu re of Ramz i bin al-Shibh” and Volume 11 for ad ditional details. 

See ■■B2507BBBHBH wmmmmm 2 250SBBH|^H; jj^BI 20744 



10406 



See also 



22694 



393 ALEC (13Q206Z SEP 02); ALEC (222334Z SEP 01); 

(2 701 32Z JUL 02); BBi 97470 (2813 17Z MAR 02) 

394 ALEC (302240Z JUN 05) 

395 ALEC (131444Z FEB 03) 



92557 (15SEP01); ALEC 



Page 75 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Ramzi bin al-Shibh was initially interrogated by a foreign 
government. 396 While officers at CIA Headquarters were dissatisfied with the intelligence 
production from his five months of detention in foreign government custody, CIA officers in that 
country were satisfied with bin al-Shibh’ s reporting. 397 Those CIA officers wrote that bin al- 
Shibh had provided information used in approximately 50 CIA intelligence reports, including 
information on potential future threats, to include a potential attack on London’s Heathrow 
Airport ancUtLNashiri’s planning for potential operations in the Arabian Peninsula. The CIA 
officers HH [in-country] also noted that they found bin al-Shibh’ s information to be generally 
accurate and that they “found few cases whei^icMmenly/clearly misstated facts.” 398 In a cable 
to CIA Headquarters, the CIA officers in [the country where Ramzi bin al-Shibh was 

being held] concluded, “overall, he provided what was needed.” The same cable stated that bin 
al-Shibh’ s interrogation was similar to other interrogations they had participated in, and that the 
most effective interrogation tool was having information available to confront him when he tried 
to mislead or provide incomplete information. 399 Personnel at CIA Headquarters concluded in 
2005 that the most significant intelligence derived from bin al-Shibh was obtained during his 
detention in foreign government custody, which was prior to his rendition to CIA custody and 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 400 

2. Interrogation Plan for Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh Proposes Immediate Use of Nudity and 
Shackling with Hands Above the Head; Plan Becomes Template for Future Detainees 

Despite the aforementioned assessments from CIA officers in 
BBI^^fconcemingbin al-Shibh’ s cooperation, officers at CIA Headquarters decided the CIA 
should obtain custody of bin al-Shibh and render him to DETENTION SITE BLUE in 
Country |. 401 On February |, 2003, in anticipatio n of bin al-Shib h’ s arrival, interrogators at the 
detention site, led by the CIA’s chief interrogator, prepared an interrogation plan 

for bin al-Shibh. 402 The plan became a template, and subsequent requests to CIA Headquarters 
to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against other detainees relied upon near 
identical language. 403 



398 

399 



396 ALEC ^^B(1115 51ZSEP0 2) 

397 DIRECTOrI^H ■■ DEC 02) 

■ 22888 (240845Z FEB 03) 

22888 (240845Z FEB 03) 

400 According to a 2005 CIA assessment, the “most significant’’ reporting from Ramzi bin al-Shibh on potential 
future attacks was background information related to al-Qa’ida’s plans to attack Heathrow Airport. According to the 
CIA, Ramzi bin al-Shibh provided “useful intelligence/’ including an “overview of the plot” that was then used in 
the interrogation of other detainees. (See ALEC |H| (302240Z JUN 05).) Ramzi bin al-Shibh provided the 
majority of this information in mid-October 2002, while in foreign government custody. See CIA 




^ITii^ncluded Khale^haykl^^ohamme^^^^^Bl065^030904^M A^03))nfambalH 

MHB^(101825ZSEP03^ Yasir al-Jaza’iri (BJ^^Ml0990B^^^BMjjB^(p^bcDiSatinLL 
Barq|^^^Bl2348 Hambali and Lill iT^^Bj|^^^^^^Bl 243 ( 1 52049Z AUG | 

I Page 76 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



top-segretw 



//N O F Q RN 



The interrogation plan proposed that immediately following the 
psychological and medical assessments conducted upon his arrival, bin al-Shibh would be 
subjected to “sensory dislocation.” 404 The proposed sensory dislocation included shaving bin al- 
Shibh’ s head and face, exposing him to loud noise in a white room with white lights, keeping 
him “unclothed and subjected to uncomfortably cool temperatures,” and shackling him “hand 
and foot with arms outstretched over his head (with his feet firmly on the floor and not allowed 
to support his weight with his arms).” 405 Contrary to CIA representations made later to the 
Committee that detainees were always offered the opportunity to cooperate before being 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the plan stated that bin al-Shibh would 
be shackled nude with his arms overhead in a cold room prior to any discussion with 
interrogators or any assessment of his level of cooperation 406 According to a cable, only after 
the interrogators determined that his “initial resistance level [had] been diminished by the 
conditions” would the questioning and interrogation phase begin 407 

The interrogation phase described in the plan included near 
constant interrogations, as well as continued sensory deprivation, a liquid diet, and sleep 
deprivation. In addition, the interrogation plan stated that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques would be used, including the “attention grasp, walling, the facial hold, the facial 
slap... the abdominal slap, cramped confinement, wall standing, stress positions, sleep 
deprivation beyond 72 hours, and the waterboard, as appropriate to [bin al-Shibh’s] level of 
resistance.” 408 

Based on versions of this interrogation plan, at least six detainees 
were stripped and shackled nude, placed in the standing position for sleep deprivation, or 
subjected to other CIA enhanced interrogation techniques prior to being questioned by an 
inteiTogator in 2003 409 Five of these detainees were shackled naked in the standing position 
with their hands above their head immediately after their medical check 410 These interrogation 



03)); Hassan Gliul ( 



JAN 04)); Adnan al-Libi 
2179 





1758 



See Volume II for detailed information on CIA representations to 



10361 
10361 

409 This included Asadullah (DIRECTOR 
35558 (| 






MAR 03)) ; Suleima n Abdul lali 
36023 



| MAY 03)); Hambali 

46471 (241242Z MAY 03); 



FEB 03)); Abu Yasir al-Jaza’ iri 

^^^^_35787 

APR 03)); Abu Hudhaifa 

1241 (15191 2Z AUG 03)); and Majid Khan 
39077 (271719Z MAY 03)). 



MAR 
38576 



4,0 For additional information, see Volume III. In an April 12, 2007, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
hearing, Senator Levin asked the CIA Director if the CIA disputed allegations in an International Committee of the 
Red Cross report that suggested CIA detainees were placed in “[prolonged stress standing position, naked, arm[s] 
chained above the head...” The CIA Director responded, “Not above the head. Stress positions are part of the EITs, 
and nakedness were part of the EITs, Senator.” Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Hearing Transcript, dated 
April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

mi 1 1 in i Mm him i 

Page 77 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



plans typically made no reference to the information the interrogators sought and why the 
detainee was believed to possess the information. 411 

3 . CIA Headquarters Urges Continued Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques, Despite Interrogators ’ Assessment That Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh Was 
Cooperative 



NF) When CIA interrogators at DETENTION SITE BLUE assessed 
that bin al-Shibh was cooperative and did not have additional knowledge of future attacks, 412 
CIA Headquarters disagreed and instructed the interrogators to continue using the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, which failed to elicit the information sought by CIA 
Headquarters. 413 On February 1 1, 2003, interrogators asked CIA Headquarters for questions that 
ALEC Station was “85 percent certain [bin al-Shibh ] will be able to answer,” in order to verify 
bin al-Shibh’ s level of cooperation 414 The interrogators stated that information from Abu 
Zubaydah and al-Nashiri suggested that bin al-Shibh would not have been given a new 
assignment or trusted with significant information given his high-profile links to the September 
11, 2001, attacks. 415 They further stated that bin al-Shibh had “achieved substantial notoriety 
after 1 1 September,” but was still unproven in al-Qa’ida circles and may have “been privy to 
information more as a bystander than as an active participant.” 416 



The CIA’s ALEC Station disagreed with the assessment of the 
detention site personnel, responding that it did not believe the portrayals of bin al-Shibh offered 
by Abu Zubaydah and al-Nashiri were accurate and that CIA Headquarters assessed that bin al- 
Shibh must have actionable information due to his proximity to KSM and CIA Headquarters’ 
belief that bin al-Shibh had a history of withholding information from interrogators. ALEC 
Station wrote: 



“As base [DETENTION SITE BLUE] is well aware, Ramzi had long 
been deliberately withholding and/or providing misleading information to 
his interrogators in [a foreign government] .... From our optic, it is 
imperative to focus Ramzi exclusively on two issues: 1) What are the 
next attacks planned for the US and 2) Who and where are the operatives 
inside the United States.” 417 



414 




41 1 See Volume III for additional information. 

10452 (121723Z FEB 03) 

(131444Z FEB 03) 

10446 (1 1 1754Z FEB 03). The Committee was informed that the CIA’s standard practice during 
coercive interrogations was to ask questions to which interrogators already knew the answers in order to assess the 
detainee’s level of cooperation. The Committee was further informed that only after detainees were assessed to be 
cooperative did interrogators ask questions whose answers were unknown to the CIA. See, for example, Transcript 
of SSCIHearing, April 12, 2007 (testimony of CIA Director Michael Hayden) (DTS #2007-3158). 

10452 (121723Z FEB 03). In June 2002, Ramzi bin al-Shibh participated with KSM in an interview 



415 



with the al-Jazeera television network on the 9/1 1 attacks. DIRECTOR 




(112136Z SEP 02). 



10452 (121723Z FEB 03) 

(131444Z FEB 03). Contrary to the statement in the CIA cable, as described, CIA officers in the 
country where Ramzi bin al-Shibh was held prior to being rendered to CIA custody wrote that Ramzi bin al-Shibh 
had provided information used in approxi mately 50 CIA intelligence reports, inc luding information on potential 

TOP SECRE T//B1BBB[[||^BBBPv NOFORN 

Page 78 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF G RN 



The ALEC Station cable stated that bin al-Shibh had “spent 
extensive time with [KSM],” and “must have heard discussions of other targets.” The cable 
added that “HQS strongly believes that Binalshibh was involved in efforts on behalf of KSM to 
identify and place operatives in the West.” The February 13, 2003, cable concluded: 



“We think Binalshibh is uniquely positioned to give us much needed 
critical information to help us thwart large-scale attacks inside the United 
States, and we want to do our utmost to get it as soon as possible. Good 
luck.” 418 



CIA officers at DETENTION SITE BLUE therefore continued to 
use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against bin al-Shibh for approximately three 
additional weeks after this exchange, including sleep deprivation, nudity, dietary manipulation, 
facial holds, attention grasps, abdominal slaps, facial slaps, and walling. 419 Bin al-Shibh did not 
provide the information sought on “operatives inside the United States” or “large-scale attacks 
inside the United States.” 420 

4. Information Already Provided by Ramzi Bin Al-Shibh in the Custody of a Foreign 
Government Inaccurately Attributed to CIA Interrogations; Interrogators Apply the 
CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques to Bin Al-Shibh When Not Addressed As “Sir” 
and When Bin Al-Shibh Complains of Stomach Pain 



c ) CIA records indicate that the CIA interrogators at DETENTION 
SITE BLUE questioning Ramzi bin al-Shibh were unaware of the Tntelligenc^i^^ 

)reviouslv provided in foreign government custody, even though 

and the intelligence from those interrogations had been disseminated by 
the CIA. On multiple occasions, personnel at the detention site drafted intelligence reports that 
contained information previously disseminated from interrogations of bin al-Shibh while he was 
in foreign government custody, under the faulty understanding that bin al-Shibh was providing 
new information 421 



future threats, to include a potential attac k on Lon don’s Heathrow airport and al-Nashiri’s planning for potential 
operations in the Arabian Peninsula. The CIA officers in that country also noted that they found Ramzi bin 

al-Shibh’s information to be generally accurate, and that they “found few cases where he openly/clearly misstated 
facts.” T he CIA officers in MUfll concluded, “overall, [Ramzi bin al-Shibh] provided what was needed.” See 
■■ 22888 (2 40845Z FEB 03). 

4,8 ALEC ■■ (131444Z FEB 03) 

419 



See, for example, | 



10525 (200840Z FEB 03) and 

detail, see the detainee review of Ramzi bin al-Shibh in Volume III. 

420 See detainee review of Ramzi bin al-Shibh in Volume III for additional in formation. 

421 See, for example, CIA 



10573 (241 143Z FEB 03). For further 




to ask Binalshibh to clarify his statements that Mohamed Atta, Marwan el-Shehhi, and Ziad Jarrah could not agree 



on the wisdom of targeting 



nuclear facilitie s”); 
I; CIA 



10568 (2315 14Z FEB 03); 



TOP SECRET/, 




20817 



7NOFORN 



Page 79 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Ramzi bin al-Shibh was subjected to interrogation techniques and 
conditions of confinement that were not approved by CIA Headquarters. CIA interrogators used 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques for behavior adjustment purposes, in response to 
perceived disrespect, and on several occasions, before bin al-Shibh had an opportunity to 
respond to an interrogator’ s questions or before a question was asked. The CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques were applied when bin al-Shibh failed to address an interrogator as 
“sir,” when interrogators noted bin al-Shibh had a “blank stare” on his face, and when bin al- 
Shibh complained of stomach pain. 422 Further, despite CIA policy at the time to keep detainees 
under constant light for security purposes, bin al-Shibh was kept in total darkness to heighten his 
sense of fear. 423 

CIA psychological assessments of bin al-Shibh were slow to 
recognize the onset of psychological problems brought about, according to later CIA 
assessments, by bin al-Shibh’ s long-term social isolation and his anxiety that the CIA would 
return to using its enhanced interrogation techniques against him. The symptoms included 
visions, paranoia, insomnia, and attempts at self-harm 424 In April 2005, a CIA psychologist 
stated that bin al-Shibh “has remained in social isolation” for as long as two and half years and 
the isolation was having a “clear and escalating effect on his psychological functioning.” The 
officer continued, “in [bin al-Shibh’ s] case, it is important to keep in mind that he was previously 
a relatively high-functioning individual, making his deterioration over the past several months 
more alarming.” 425 The psychologist wrote, “significant alterations to RBS’[s] detention 
environment must occur soon to prevent further and more serious psychological disturbance.” 426 
On September 5, 2006, bin al-Shibh was transferred to U.S. military custody at Guantanamo 
Bay, Cuba. 427 After his arrival, bin al-Shibh was placed on anti-psychotic medications. 428 

The CIA disseminated 109 intelligence reports from the CIA 
interrogations of Ramzi bin al-Shibh. 429 A CIA assessment, which included intelligence from his 



422 

423 



10582 (242026Z FEB 03); 



|^| 10627 (281949Z FEB 03) 

10521 (191750Z FEB 03). The cable referred to keeping bin al-Shibh in darkness as a “standard 
interrogation technique.” The same cable states that during the night of February 18, 2003, the light went out in bin 
al-Shibh’s cell and that “[w]hen security personnel arrived to replace the bulb, bin al-Shibh was cowering in the 
comer, shivering. Security personnel noted that he appeared relieved as soon as die light was replaced.” 



040023Z NOV 05); 

1930 (061620Z DEC 04); | 

2535 (05180 5Z JUL 05); 

1890 (171225Z NOV 





424 



1759 (021319Z O CT 04); HEADQUARTERS^ 

(171225Z NOV 04); (140915Z NOV 04); 

2207 (11131 9Z APR 05k^BBHh210O415()7Z APR 05); | 

2589 ( 1 20857ZJUL05)T|BBiHM 2830 ( 29 1 304Z AUG 05); 

1893 (20083 1Z NOV 04); CIA document entitled, “Detainee Talking Points for ICRC Rebuttal, 




2210 (1 41507Z APR 05); 

(141507Z APR 05); ^^^^>2535 (051805Z JUL 05); | 

1 9 30 (06 1 620Z DEC04)~^^MM 2210 (141507Z APR 05) 
2210(1 41 507Z APR 05) 

2210 (141507Z APR 05) 



2535 ( 051805Z JUL 05); 

2830 (291304Z AUG 05); 




HEADQUARTERS 



| (031945Z SEP 06) 



SITE DAILY REPORT - 24 MAY 07: 
429 See Volume II for additional information. 

TOP SECRET// 



8904(1 82 103Z APR 08) 



// NOFORN 



Page 80 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



//NOFORN 



time in foreign government custody, as well as his reporting in CIA custody before, during, and 
after being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 430 concluded that: 

“Much of [bin al-Shibh’s] statements on the 1 1 September attacks have been 
speculative, and many of the details could be found in media accounts of the 
attacks that appeared before he was detained. In the few instances where his 
reporting was unique and plausible, we cannot verify or refute the 
information... he has been sketchy on some aspects of the 9/11 plot, perhaps in 
order to downplay his role in the plot. His information on individuals is non- 
specific; he has given us nothing on the Saudi hijackers or others who played a 
role... The overall quality of his reporting has steadily declined since 2003. ” 431 



G. The Detention and Interrogation of Khalid Shaykh Muhammad 

1. KSM Held in Pakistani Custody , Provides Limited Information; Rendered to CIA Custody 
at DETENTION SITE COBALT, KSM Is Immediately Subjected to the CIA ’s Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques 



(T The capture of KSM was attributable to^ingl^CI^ourc^vho 
first came to the CIA’s attention in the spring of 2001. 432 The source 
m led the CIA and Pakistan authorities directly to KSM. KSM was held in Pakistani 
custody from the time of his capture on March 1, 2003, to March 2003, and was interrogated 
by CIA officers and Pakistani officials. According to CIA records, while in Pakistani custody, 
KSM was subjected to some sleep deprivation, but there are no indications of other coercive 
interrogation techniques being used. 433 While KSM denied knowledge of attack plans and the 
locations of Usama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri 434 he did provide limited information on 
various al-Qa’ida leaders and operatives who had already been captured. KSM’s willingness to 
discuss operatives when confronted with information about their capture — behavior noted by 
CIA officers on-site in Pakistan — was a recurring theme throughout KSM’s subsequent detention 
and interrogation in CIA custody 435 



Less than two hours after KSM’s capturc^nticipating KSM’s 
arrival at DETENTION SITE COBALT, the chief of interrogations, sent an ema il 

to CIA Headquarters with the subject line, “Let’s roll with the new guy.” The email requested 
permission to “press [KSM] for threat info right away.” 436 Later that day, CIA Headquarters 



authorized 



to use a number of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against 



430 Ramzi bin al-Shibh was immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques at DETENTION 
SITE BLUE. 



431 



ALEC 




(302240Z JUN 05) 

432 For more detail s, see section of this summary on the capture of KSM and additional information in Volume II. 
41403 (020949Z MAR 03) 

44484 (031315Z MAR 03) 

41564 (041307Z MAR 03); 

detention in Pakistani custody, see the KSM detainee rev i ew in Volume III. 

436 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
date: March 1, 2003, at 03:43:12 AM. 

TOP SECRET/ 

Page 81 of 499 



1592 (051050Z MAR 03). For details on KSM’s 
; subject: Let’s Roll with the new guy; 

/NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



KSM. The cable from CIA Headquarters did not require that non-coercive interrogation 
techniques be used first. 437 On March 2003, two days before KSM’s arrival at the detention 
site, CIA Headquarters approved an interrogation plan for KSM. 438 

According to CIA records, interrogators began using the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques at DETENTION SITE COBALT a “few minutes” after the 
questioning of KSM began. KSM was subjected to facial and abdominal slaps, the facial grab, 
stress positions, standing sleep deprivatio n (with his han ds at or above head level), nudity, and 
water dousing 439 Chief of Interrogations IHHHI also ordered the rectal rehydration of 
KSM without a determination of medical need, a procedure that the chief of interrogations would 
later characterize as illustrative of the interrogator’s “total control over the detainee.” 440 At the 
end of the day, the psychologist on-site concluded that the interrogation team would likely have 
more success by “avoiding confrontations that allow [KSM] to transform the interrogation into 
battles of will with the interrogator.” 441 KSM’s reporting during his first day in CIA custody 
included an accurate description of a Pakistani/British operative, which was dismissed as having 
been provided during the initial “‘throwaway’ stage” of information collection when the CIA 
believed detainees provided false or worthless information. 442 




|, by [REDACTED] and 



(01224 0Z M AR 03) 
34354 (■■ 



n MAR 03); DIRECTOR ■■ (HH MAR 03) 

3449 1 (05 1 400Z MAR 03) 

34491 (051400Z MAR 03); Interview of | 

[REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 27 March 2003. 

441 34575 

442 “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT, 
April 3, 2003. KSM also named three individuals who, he said, worked on an al -Qa’ida anthrax progra m that wa s 
still in its “earliest stages.” They were led, he said, by “Omar” who had been arrested in the country off ~ 



The group also included Abu Bakr al-Filistini. ( See 
would later state that “Yazid” led al-Qa’ida*s anthrax efforts. ( See 




34475 



KSM 



10769 (120937Z MAR 03).) Yazid 



Sufaat, who had been in 



[foreign government] custody since 2001, had long been suspected of 



a’ida chemical and biological activities. (See email from: [REDACTED]; to: 




|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; 
subject: FOR COORD by noon please: Yazid Sufaat PDB; date: March 14, 2003, at 09:05 AM; email from: 
[REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: ■ 



■ RESPONSE - INDIVIDUALS CONNECTED TO 
USAMA BIN LAPIN ASSOCIATE YAZID SUFAAT; date: March 6, 2003, at 12:50:27 PM; 



|; to: [REDACTED]; SUBJECT: Re: KSM on WMD; date: March 12, 2003, at 

[foreign 



email from: 

08:28:31 AM.) A draft PDB prepared on March 17, 2003, states that “Sufaat’s own claims to 
government] authorities and personal background tracks with KSM’s assertions.” (See “KSM Guarding Most 
Sensitive Information,” labeled “For the President Only 18 March 2003,” stamped 0319 ksmupdate.doc 17 March 
2003.) On April 3, 2003, an IICT analysis stated that KSM “likely judges that information related to Sufaat already 
has been compromised since his arrest.” (See “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths , 
Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT, April 3, 2003.) CIA analysis from 2005 stated that 
MMi [a foreign government holding Sufaat] was likely to have known details of Yazid’ s involvement in al- 
Qa’ida’s anthrax program by early 2002,” although that information was not provided at the time to the CIA. (See 
CIA Directorate of Intelligence; “Al-Qa’ida’s Anthrax Program; Cracks Emerge in a Key Reporting Stream; New 



Insights into Yazid Sufaat’s Credibility | 



I” (DTS #2005-3264).) Al-Filistini was later 



captured and detained by the CIA. While being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques he 
changed his description of al-Qa’ida’s anthrax efforts multiple times. On August 1, 2003, Abu Bakr al-Filistini, also 
known as Samr al-Barq, told CIA interrogators that “we never made anthrax.” At the time, he was being subjected 
to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and was told that the harsh treatment would not stop until he “told 
the truth.” According to cables, crying, al-Barcnhensjm Asked if he was lying, al-Barq said 

TOP 

Page 82 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 



) On March 5, 2003, and March 6, 2003, while he was still at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT, KSM was subjected to nudity and sleep deprivatiomOn March 
5, 2003, KSM wa s also subjected to additional rectal rehydration, 443 which ||^^^HOMS, 
mmm, described a s helping to “clear a person’s head” and effective in getting KSM 
to talk. 444 On March 6, 2003, adopted a ‘“softer Mr. Rogers’ persona” after the 

interrogation team concluded that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques had caused KSM 
to “clam up.” 445 During this session KSM was described as “more cooperative,” and the day’s 
interrogation was deemed the “best session held to date” by the interrogation team. 446 During 
this period KSM fabricated information on an individual whom he described as the protector of 
his children. 447 That information resulted in the capture and CIA detention of two innocent 
individuals. 448 

2. The CIA Transfers KSM to DETENTION SITE BLUE, Anticipates Use of the Waterboard 
Prior to His Arrival 

#NF) Within hours of KSM’s capture, ALEC Station successfully argued 
that CIA contractors SWIGERT and DUNBAR should take over the interrogation of KSM upon 
KSM’s arrival at DETENTION SITE BLUE. 449 On March 3, 2003, CIA Headquarters approved 
an interrogation plan indicating that KSM “will be subjected to immediate interrogation 
techniques,” and that “the interrogation techniques will increase in intensity from standard to 



that he was. After CIA interrogators “demonstrated the penalty for lying,” al-Barq again statedthat“I made the 
anthrax” and then immediately recanted, and then again stated that he made anthrax. ( See 1015 (012057Z 

AUG 03).) Two days later, al-Barq state d that he ha d lied about the anthrax production “only because he thought 
that was what interrogators wanted.” 5ee^^U^^017 (03081 2Z AUG 03). 

~ 34575 

444 1 1 I UBBMK to: [REDACTED]; cc: [R EDACTED], subj ect: Re: 

Departure; date : March 6, 2003, at 7:11:59 PM; email from: to: [REDACTED]; cc: HHH 

subject: Re: Up date; date: March 6, 2003, at 4:5 1 :32 PM. 

34573 (061 75 1 Z MAR 03); 34614 ( 071551Z MAR ° 3 ) 

34573 (061 75 1 Z MAR 03); 34614 (071551Z MAR 03) 

447 In June 2004, KSM described his reporting as “all lies.” 34569 (061722Z MAR 03); 

■■■■ 1281 (130801Z JUN 04). 

448 The two individuals, Sayed Habib and Shaistah Habibullah Khan, entered CI/^ustod^r^pri^n^uly 2003 

respectively, and we re released i n August and Fe bruary 2004, respectively. ( See 57 1 2 

I; email from: to: [REDACTED]UREDACTED]^ubject: 

planned release of [DETENTION SITE ORANGE] detainee Syed Habib; and 

CIA document, “Additional Details for DCIA on Sayed Habib’s Arrest and Detention.”) The CIA’s June 2013 
Response states that the detention of the two individuals “can only be considered ‘wrongful’ after the fact, not in the 
light of credible information available at the time and in a context in which plot disruption was deemed an urgent 
national priority.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response further states that KSM’s reporting on March 6, 2003, was 
“credible” because, at the time, “[CIA] assessed that Khalid Shaykli Muhammad (KSM) had moved to a more 
cooperative posture as his interrogation progressed.” A review of CIA records indicates that the CIA subjected 
KSM to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques the following day-The^ise of the technique^ontin^ until 
March 25, 2003 , and included 183 a pplications of the waterboard. See H |H 1071 1 

449 Interview of ^HH^HHHKby [REDACTED] and [REDACTCD]^ffic^)f the Inspector General, April 3, 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: KSM planning; date: March 1, 2003, at 07:07:33 AM. 



Page 83 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFQRN 



enhanced techniques commensurate with [KSM’s] level of resistance, until he indicates initial 
cooperation.” 450 On March |, 2003, the day of KSM’s arrival at DETENTION SITE BLUE, the 
on-site medical officer described the use of the waterboard on KSM as inevitable: 



“[T]he team here apparently looks to use the water board in two different 
contexts. One is as a tool of regression and control in which it is used up front 
and aggressively. The second is to vet information on an as needed basis. 

Given the various pressures from home vs what is happening on the ground, I 
think the team’s expectation is that [KSM] will [be] getting treatment 
somewhere in between. I don’t think they believe that it will be possible to 
entirely avoid the water board given the high and immediate threat to US and 
allied interests. It is an interesting dynamic because they are well aware of the 
toll it will take on the team vs. the detainee. The requirements coming from 
home are really unbelievable in terms of breadth and detail.” 451 

Meanwhile, OMS completed draft guidelines on the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, specifically addressing the waterboard interrogation 
technique. These guidelines were sent to the medical personnel at the detention site. The 
guidelines included a warning that the risk of the waterboard was “directly related to number of 
exposures and may well accelerate as exposures increase,” that concerns about cumulative 
effects would emerge after three to five days, and that there should be an upper limit on the total 
number of waterboard exposures, “perhaps 20 in a week.” CIA records indicate that, as of the 
day of KSM’s arrival at DETENTION SITE BLUE, the interrogation team had not reviewed the 
draft OMS guidelines. 452 



KSM arrived at DETENTION SITE BLUE at approximately 6:00 
PM local time on March |, 2003, and was immediately stripped and placed in the standing sleep 
deprivation position. 453 At 6:38 PM, after the medical and psychological personnel who had 
traveled with KSM from DETENTION SITE COBALT cleared KSM for the CIA’s enhanced 
inteiTogation techniques, the detention site requested CIA Headquarters’ approval to begin the 
interrogation process 454 The detention site received the approvals at 7:18 PM, 455 at which point 
the interrogators began using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on KSM 456 

2003, contractors 
, used the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against KSM, including nudity, standing sleep deprivation, the attention 



SWIGERT and DUNBAR, and a CIA interrogator, 



450 



10654 (030904Z MAR 03); DIRECT OR 
SWIGERT and CIA interrogator 
2003. DIRECTOR 

451 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

| 2003, at 3:51:09 AM. 

452 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

M arch t 200 3, at 3: 22:45 PM . 

iH 10711 




453 

454 



10705 



455 DIRECTOR 




10711 



TOP SECRET// 



| (041444Z MAR 03). The initial approval was for 

The authorization was extended to DUNBAR on March |, 

cc: ■■■■; subject: Technique; date: March 

HHHSHIIIII; subject: Re: Technique; date: 



cc: 



Page 84 of 499 



/ /NOFQRN 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NQF O R N 



grab and insult slap, the facial grab, the abdominal slap, the kneeling stress position, and 
walling. 457 There were no debriefers present. According to the CIA interrogator, during KSM’s 
first day at DETENTION SITE BLUE, SWIGERT and DUNBAR first began threatening KSM’s 
children. 458 Legal, ^ ater the inspector general that 

these threats were legal so long as the threats were “conditional.” 459 On March 9, 2003, KSM 
fabricated information indicating that Jaffar al-Tayyar and Jose Padilla were plotting together 460 
because, as he explained on April 23, 2003, he “felt some pressure to produce information about 
operations in the United States in the initial phases of his interrogation.” 461 

On March M, 20 03, Deputy Chief o f ALEC Station 
IJjjJandasecond ALEC Station officer, arrived at DETENTION SITE 

BLUE to serve as debriefers. The detention site also reportedly received a phone call from CIA 
Headquarters conveying the views of the CIA’s Deputy Director of Operations James Pavitt on 
the inteiTOgation of KSM. 462 Pavitt later told the inspector general that he “did not recall 
specifically ordering that a detainee be waterboarded right away,” but he “did not discount that 
possibility.” According to records of the interview, “Pavitt did recall saying, ‘I want to know 
what he knows, and I want to know it fast.’” 463 The on-site medical officer later wrote in an 
email that the CIA interrogators “felt that the [waterboard] was the big stick and that HQ was 
more or less demanding that it be used early and often.” 464 

3. The CIA Waterboards KSM at Least 183 Times; KSM’s Reporting Includes Significant 
Fabricated Information 



On March 10, 2003, KSM was subjected to the first of his 15 
separate waterboarding sessions. The first waterboarding session, which lasted 30 minutes (10 
more than anticipated in the Office of Legal Counsel’s August 1, 2002, opinion), was followed 
by the use of a horizontal stress position that had not previously been approved by CIA 
Headquarters. 465 The chief of Base, worried about the legal implications, prohibited the on-site 




10711 

10731 




10725 ■■■ 10732 

10741 (100917Z MAR 03) 

|. by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 30, 
, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 



458 Interview of | 

2003. Interview of | 

October 22, 2003. 

459 CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program (2003-7123-IG), 

January 2004. 



10740 (092308Z MAR 03), disseminated as | 



10741 (100917Z M AR 



03) 

461 | 



11377 (231943Z APR 03), disseminated as 

, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 30 April 



462 Interview of 
2003. 

463 Interview of James Pavitt, by 
2003. 

464 Email from: 

10, 2 003, at 5 :59:27 PM. 

10752 (102320Z MAR 03) 

TOP SECRET// 



465 



and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 21, 
I; cc: 



; subject: More; date: April 

/NQFORN 



Page 85 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



// NOF O R N 



medical officer from reporting on the interrogation directly to OMS outside of official CIA cable 
traffic. 466 



(TS^IHHHBVNE) On March 12, 2003, KSM provided information on the Heathrow 
Airport and Canary Wharf plotting. KSM stated that he showed a sketch in his notebook of a 
building in Canary Wharf (a major business district in London) to Ammar al-Baluchi. 467 He also 
provided statements about directing prospective pilots to study at flight schools, 468 and stated that 
Jaffar al-Tayyar was involved in the Heathrow Plot. 469 KSM retracted all of this information 
later in his detention 470 There are no CIA records indicating that these and other retractions 
were assessed to be false. 



The March 12, 2003, reporting from KSM on the Heathrow Airport 
plotting was deemed at the time by CIA interrogators to be an effort by KSM to avoid discussion 
of plotting inside the United States and thus contributed to the decision to subject KSM to two 
waterboarding sessions that day 471 During these sessions, KSM ingested a significant amount of 
water. CIA records state that KSM’s “abdomen was somewhat distended and he expressed water 
when the abdomen was pressed.” 472 KSM’s gastric contents were so diluted by water that the 
medical officer present was “not concerned about regurgitated gastric acid damaging KSM’s 
esophagus.” 473 The officer was, however, concerned about water intoxication and dilution of 
electrolytes and requested that the interrogators use saline in future waterboarding sessions 474 
The medical officer later wrote to ^^B^|OMS that KSM was “ingesting and aspiration [sic] 
a LOT of water,” and that “[i]n the new technique we are basically doing a series of near 
drownings.” 475 During the day, KSM was also subjected to the attention grasp, insult slap, 
abdominal slap, and walling 476 



O n March 13, 2003, after KSM again denied that al-Qa’ida had 
operations planned for inside the United States, CIA interrogators decided on a “day of intensive 



466 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: cc: | 

3/1 0; date: M arch 11 , 2003, at 8:10:39 AM. 

10798 (131816Z MAR 03), disseminated as 
10778 (121549Z MAR 03), disseminated as 
10778 (121549Z MAR 03), disseminated as 




(27223 1ZJUN 03); 




22939 (031541Z JUL 04); 



|; subject: Re: MEDICAL SITREP 



10883 (1 821 27Z MAR 03), 



12141 

disseminated as 

471 



10787 (130716Z MAR 03). The CIA would later represent that the information KSM provided on the 
Heathrow plotting was an example of the effectiveness of the waterboard interrogation technique, listing the 
Heathrow Plot as one of the “plots discovered as a result of ElTs” in a briefing on the waterboard for the President 
in November 2007. See document entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated 
November6, 2007, with the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 
1 0800 (131909Z M AR 03) 

, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, May 15, 



472 



473 Interview of 
20 03. 

474 10800 (131909Z MAR 03); Interview of 
Office of the Inspector General, May 15, 2003. 

475 Email from: to: 

10, 2003, at 5:59:27 PM. Emphasis in the original. 

476 I 



cc: 



10787 ( 1 307 16Z MAR 03) 

TOP SECRET// 



|, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], 

|; subject: More; date: April 

/ /NOFORN 



Page 86 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S E G RET// 



//NOFQR N 



waterboard sessions.” 477 During the first of three waterboarding sessions that day, interrogators 
responded to KSM’s efforts to breathe during the sessions by holding KSM’s lips and directing 
the water at his mouth. 478 According to a cable from the detention site, KSM “would begin 
signaling by pointing upward with his two index fingers as the water pouring approached the 
established time limit.” The cable noted that “[t]his behavior indicates that the subject remains 
alert and has become familiar with key aspects of the process.” 479 CIA records state that KSM 
“yelled and twisted” when he was secured to the waterboard for the second session of the day, 
but “appeared resigned to tolerating the board and stated he had nothing new to say” about 
terrorist plots inside the United States. 480 

(TS/^^HIIIII^H^NE) Prior to the third waterboard session of that calendar day, the on- 
site medical officer raised concerns that the waterboard session — which would be the fourth in 
14 hours — would exceed the limits included in draft OMS guidelines that had been distributed 
the previous afternoon 481 Those draft guidelines stated that up to three waterboard sessions in a 
24-hour period was acceptable 482 At the time, KSM had been subjected to more than 65 
applications of water during the four waterboarding sessions between the afternoon of March 12, 
2003, and the morning of March 13, 200 3. In response to a request for approval from the chief 
of Base, CTC attorney assured detention site personnel that the me dical office r 

“is incorrect that these guidelines have been approved and/or fully coordinated.” 483 BHHHH 
sent an email to the detentio n site authorizing the additional waterboarding session. 484 Despite 
indications from m that the detention site personnel would receive a formal authorizing 
cable, no such authori zation from CIA Headquarters was provided. At the end of the day, the 
medical officer wrote ^UmiOMS that “[tjhings are slowly evolving form [sic] OMS being 
viewed as the institutional conscience and the limiting factor to the ones who are dedicated to 
maximizing the benefit in a safe manner and keepingeveryone’s butt out of trouble.” The 
medical officer noted that his communication with was no longer “viewed with 

suspicion.” 485 On the afternoon of March 13, 2003, KSM was subjected to his third waterboard 
session of that calendar day and fifth in 25 hours. CIA records note that KSM vomited during 
and after the procedure. 486 



477 



10804 (140710Z MAR 03); 




478 Interview of 



10790 (130946Z MAR 03) 

|, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 30, 
20 03. The in terviewee was a CIA interrogator for KSM at the CIA detention site. 

10790 (130946Z MAR 03) 

10791 (131229Z MAR 03) 




481 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: cc: 

Rodriguez; subj ect: re: Eyes Only - Legal and Political Q uand[]i 

482 Email from: 



|; to: [REDACTED]; cc: 
3/10; date: Mar ch 12, 2003, at 2: 09:47 PM. 

483 Email from: 



I; to: [REDACTED]; cc: 



^ ose 

'; date: March 13, 2003, at 11:28:06 AM. 

1; subject: Re: MEDICAL S1TREP 

Jose 



Rodriguez; subject: Re: EYES ONLY - Legal and Political Quandary; date: March 13, 2003, at 8:01:12 AM. 



484 Email from: 




; to: [REDACTED ]; cc: Jose Rodriguez, HHH 

; subject: EYES ONLY - Use of Water Board; date: March 13, 



2003, at 08:28 AM. 

485 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 



cc: 



|; subject: Re: State cable; date: 



March 13, 2003, at 1 :43: 17 PM. The previous day, the medical officer had written t hat “I am going the extr a mile to 
to handle this in a non confrontational manner.” Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

|; subject: Re: MEDICAL SITREP 3/10; date: March 12, 2003, at 5:17:07 AM. 

10803 (131929Z MAR 03) 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi mu i 

Page 87 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Shortly thereafter, CIA Headquarters began reevaluating the use of 
the waterboard interrogation technique. According to a March 14, 2003, email from an 
interrogator who was not at DETENTION SITE BLUE, but was reviewing cable traffic, the 
“[o]verall view seems to be” that the waterboard “is not working in gaining KSM[’s] 
compliance.” 487 The deputy chief of the CIA interrogation program responded in agreement, 
adding that “|a]gainst KSM it has proven ineffective,” and that “[t]he potential for physical harm 
is far greater with the waterboard than with the other techniques, bringing into question the issue 
of risk vs. gain. ...” The deputy chief further suggested that the waterboard was 
counterproductive, stating that “[wje seem to have lost ground” with KSM since progress made 
at DETENTION SITE COBALT, and as a result, the CIA should “consider the possibility” that 
the introduction of the waterboard interrogation techn ique “may poison the well.” 488 The email 
in which these sentiments were expressed was sent to CTC attorney 

overseeing the interrogation of KSM. Despite these reservations and assessments, the 
waterboarding of KSM continued for another 10 days 489 



On March 15, 2003, KSM was waterboarded for failing to confirm 
references in signals intercepts on al-Qa’ida’s efforts to obtain “nuclear suitcases.” 490 
Subsequent signals intercepts and information from a foreign government would later indicate 
that the nuclear suitcase threat was an orchestrated scam. 491 KSM was waterboarded a second 
time that day after failing to provide information on operations against the United States or on al- 
Qa’ida nuclear capabilities 492 During the waterboarding sessions that day, the application of the 
interrogation technique further evolved, with the interrogators now using their hands to maintain 
a one-inch deep “pool” of water over KSM’s nose and mouth in an effort to make it impossible 
for KSM to ingest all the water being poured. 493 At one point, SWIGERT and DUNBAR waited 
for KSM to talk before pouring water over his mouth 494 



487 Email from: 



to: 



cc: 



I, [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED]; subject: re Summary of KSM Waterboard Sessions - As of 1000 HRS 14 Mar 03; date: March 14, 
2003, at 10:44:12 AM. 



488 Email from: 



cc: 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|; subject: re Summary of KSM Waterboard Sessions - As of 1000 HRS 14 MAR 03; date: March 
14, 2003, at 02:02:42 PM. 

489 See detailed review of these sessions in Volume III. 



490 



10831 (151510Z MAR 03); 



10841 (152007Z MAR 03); 



10849 (161058Z MAR 



|, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 



03); Interview of | 

May 15, 2003. 

491 The original reporting, that al-Qa’ida had purchased nuclear suitcases in Yemen, was later determined to be 
based on an effort by unknown Yemenis to sell “suitcase weapons” to al-Qa’ida. Al-Qa’ida operatives concluded 



that the offer was a scam 
HEADQUARTERS 



See 



492 



m 74492 (250843Z JUL 03), disseminated as 
(092349Z D EC 04). 

10841 (152007Z MAR 03); 1083 1 (151510Z MAR 03) 

493 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: subject: Re: Sitrep as of AM 3/15; 

date: March 15, 2003, at 3:52:54 A.NTInterviewofH((^^^B|[^^^^REDACTED] and [REDACTED], 
Office of the Inspector General, May 15, 2003. See also interviewof^|^^mm, by [REDACTED] and 
[REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, May 15, 2003. The descriptions of the use of the waterboard 
interrogation technique against KSM were provided by these two on-site medical officers. 



494 Interview of I 
2003. 



|, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, May 15, 

TOP 

Page 88 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



On th e afternoon o f March 17, 2003, and into the morning of 
Marchl8720037^^lBilHH, exchanged emails wi th the medic al officer 

at DETENTION SITE BLUE on the waterboarding of KSM. According to the 

waterboard interrogation technique had “moved even further from the SERE model.” 495 
also wrote: 




“Truthfully, though, I don’t recall that the WB [waterboard] produced anything 
actionable in AZ [Abu Zubaydah] any earlier than another technique might 
have. This may be different with KSM, but that is still as much a statement of 
faith as anything else - since we don’t seem to study the question as we go. . . 
it’s been many more days of constant WB repetitions, with the evidence of 
progress through most of them not being actionable intel but rather that ‘he 
looks like he’s weakening.’ The WB may actually be the best; just don’t like 
to base it on religion.” 496 



(TS4BBHH//NF) On March 18, 2003, KSM was confronted with the reporting of 
Majid Khan, who was then in the custody of a foreign government 497 regarding plotting against 
gas stations inside the United States, information that KSM had not previously discussed. In 
assessing the session, DETENTION SITE BLUE personnel noted that “KSM will selectively lie, 
provide partial truths, and misdirect when he believes he will not be found out and held 
accountable.” On the other hand, they wrote that “KSM appears more inclined to make accurate 



495 Email to: [REDACTED]; from: 
March 17, 2003, at 01:11:35 PM. 



|; subject: Re: Medical limitations of WB - draft thoughts; date: 



; to: [REDACTED]; cc: 



|; subject: Oct 18; date: March 18, 



496 Email from: 

2003, at 10:52:03 AM. 

497 Majid Khan, who was arrested on March 5, 2003, provided extensive information prior to being rendered to CIA 
custody. This included information on lyman Fans, Uzhair (Paracha) and his father, Aafia Sidiqqi, his transfer of 
al-Qa’ida funds to a Bangkok-based Zubair, and his discussions with KSM regarding various proposed plots. Majid 
Khan also provided assistance to the CIA in its efforts to locate Ammar al-Baluchi, including through Abu Talha al- 



Pakistani. 



03); | 



13697 (080 730Z MAR 03); | 

44244 (1614 23Z A PR 03); 
13785 



1367 8 (070724Z MAR 03); 

13826 (190715Z MAR 03); 

13686 (071322Z MAR 03); 




13833 (200454Z MAR 03); 

13932 (271244Z MAR 03); 



|13765 

44684 (25 0633Z APR 03); 

13908 (26025 1Z MAR 
138901 



13710 



(081218Z MAR 03).) After being rendered to CIA custody, Majid Khan was subjected by the CIA to sleey 
deprivation, nudity, and dietary manipulation, and may have been subjected to an ice water bath. 

39077 (271719Z MAY 03); 



39099 (281 101Z MAY 




, Briefing for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, March 14, 



41772 (121230ZJU L 03); 

[REDACTED], 




42025 

and 




Re: i hope the 



approvals for enhanced comes through quickly for this guy... this does not look good”; date: June 30, 2003.) A 
June 2006 CIA email stated that Majid Khan said he ‘‘fabricated a lot of his early [CIA] interrogation reporting to 
stop... what he called ‘torture.’” According to the email, Khan stated that he was “hung up” for approximately one 
day in a sleep deprived position and that he provided “everything they wanted to hear to get out of the situation.” 



(, See email from: [REDACTED] ; to: 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 




[REDACTED], 

|: request for prozac; date: June 16, 2006.) As 



; subject: 

detailed in this summary and in more detail in Volume II, the CIA inaccurately attributed information provided by 
Majid Khan in foreign government custod y to the CIA interrogations of KSM. 

TOP SECRE T//B||M|BBB|^^^B//NOFORN 

Page 89 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NQFORN 



disclosures when he believes people, emails, or other source material are available to the USG 
for checking his responses.” 498 

The same day, KSM provided additional information on the 
Heathrow Airport plotting, much of which he would recant in 2004. 499 KSM also discussed 
Jaffar al-Tayyar again, prompting the detention site personnel to refer to the “all-purpose” al- 
Tayyar whom KSM had “woven... into practically every story, each time with a different 
role.” 500 After KSMhadincluded al-Tayyar in his discussion of Majid Khan’s gas station plot, 
KSM debriefer wrote in an email that “[t]oday [al-Tayyar’s] working with Majid 

Khan, yesterday the London crowd, the day before Padilla - you get the point.” 501 Beginning the 
evening of March 18, 2003, KSM began a period of sleep deprivation, most of it in the standing 
position, which would last for seven and a half days, or approximately 180 hours. 502 

On March 19, 2003, the interrogators at the detention site decided 
to waterboard KSM due to KSM’s inconsistent information about Jaffar al-Tayyar’s passport. 503 
According to CIA cables, after assuming his position on the waterboard, KSM “seemed to lose 
control” and appeared “somewhat frantic,” stating that he “had been forced to lie, and ma[k]e up 
stories about” Jaffar al-Tayyar because of his interrogators. 504 KSM then stated that his 
reporting on al-Tayyar’s role in Majid Khan’s plotting was a “complete fabrication” and that al- 
Tayyar had been compromised as an operative and that as a result, al-Tayyar could not be used 
for a terrorist operation. 505 In response, the interrogators told KSM that they only wanted to hear 
hin^peak if he was revealing information on the next attack. 506 Deputy Chief of ALEC Station 
l ater tQ ld the inspector general that it was around this time that contract interrogator 
DUNBAR stated that “he had not seen a ‘resistor’ [sic] like KSM, and was ‘going to go to school 
on this guy.’” 507 According to CIA records, the interrogators then “devote[d] all measures to 
pressuring [KSM] on the single issue of the ‘next attack on America,”’ including attention grabs, 
insult slaps, walling, water dousing, and additional waterboard sessions. 508 



O n March 20, 2003, KSM continued to be subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques throughout the day, including a period of “intense questioning 





22939 (03154LZJUL 04). CIA 



; to: [REDACTED]; subject: JAFAR REQUEST; date: March 



10884 ( 1 82 140Z MAR 03) 

10883 (182127Z MAR 03), disseminated as 

records indicate that CIA officers believed that KSM’s recantations were credible. See KSM detainee review in 
Vo lume III. 

500 0884 (182140Z MAR 03) 

501 Email from: [REDACTED], OFFICE: 

18 , 2003, at 0 8:16:07 PM. 

10884 (182140Z MAR 03); | 

10969 (240950Z MAR 03) 

10892 (191503Z MAR 03); f 
10902 (201037Z MAR 03) 

10894 (191513Z MAR 03); 

1 0902 (201037Z MAR 03) 

by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 3, 



10888 (190805Z MAR 03); 
10902 (201037Z MAR 03) 
10902 (201037Z MAR 03) 



10999 (260835Z MAR 



507 Interview of 
2003. 

10902 (201037Z MAR 03); 



508 

03) 



TOP SECRET// 



10900 (191907Z MAR 03); 
Page 90 of 499 



10896 (19 1524Z MAR 

VN OFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



and walling.” 509 KSM was described as “[t]ired and sore,” with abrasions on his ankles, shins, 
and wrists, as well as on the back of his head. 510 He also suffered from pedal edema resulting 
from extended standing. 51 1 After having concluded that there was “no further movement” in the 
interrogation, the detention site personnel hung a picture of KSM’s sons in his cell as a way to 
“[heighten] his imagination concerning where they are, who has them, [and] what is in store for 
them.” 512 

The waterboarding of KSM on March 21, 2003, and March 22, 
2003, was basedonamisrcadin^)f intelligence provided by Majid Khan b^Deput^hief of 
ALEC Station According to a cable from the CIA’s HIHIH’ Khan, 

who was in foreign government custody, had stated that KSM wanted to use “two to three 
unknown Black American Muslim converts who were currently training in Afghanistan,” to 
“conduct attacks” on gas stations in the United States, and that “KSM was interested in usin^^ 
anyone with US status to assist with this operation.” 513 Upon receipt of this reporting, PHBM 
wrote in an email “i love the Black American Muslim at AQ camps in Afghanistan [sic] . . . 
Mukie [KSM] is going to be hatin’ life on this one.” 514 However, her subsequent questioning of 
KSM was not based on Khan’s actual reporting, which was about potential operatives already in 
Afghanistan, but rather something Khan had not said — that KSM directed him to make contact 
with African-American converts in the United States. 515 According to CIA records, in a 
“contentious” session that lasted for hours and involved the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, KSM “flatly denied” any efforts to recruit African-American Muslim 
converts. KSM was then waterboarded. 516 Later in the day, facing the threat of a second 
waterboarding session, KSM “relented and said that maybe he had told Khan that he should see 
if he could make contact with members of the Black American Muslim convert community.” 
The CIA interrogators then returned KSM to the standing sleep deprivation position without a 
second waterboarding session. 517 

The next day, March 22, 2003, interrogators subjected KSM to 
“intense” questioning and walling, but when KSM provided no new information on African- 
American Muslim converts or threats inside the United States, he was subjected to additional 



10916 (210845Z MAR 03); WKtM 10921 (211046Z MAR 03) 

10916 (210845Z MAR 03) 

1 0909 (2019 18Z M AR 03) 

512 Interviewof^^Himff^l, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, October 
22, 2003jP^Bl0917(210907Z MAR 03). 

513 IJlB 839 (201434Z MAR 03) 

I in il I MMIMM from: [REDACTED] OFFIC&^MM^DETENTION S1TE BLUE]; subject: Re: 
Majid Khan; date: March 20, 2003, at 03:40:17 PM. The ^^^(cablewas formally sent to DETENTION SITE 
BLUE via ALEC (210015Z MAR 03). 

515 

516 

517 

llll II III I ^ 1 I 1111 Mill I 

Page 91 of 499 



10932 (212132Z MAR 03) 

10932 (212132Z MAR 03); ■■■ 10922 (21 1256Z MAR 03) 
10932 (212132Z MAR 03) 




UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



#NOFORN 



waterboarding. 518 An hour later, KSM stated that he was “ready to talk.” 519 He told the CIA 
interrogators that he had sent Abu Issa al-Britani to Montana to recruit African-American 
Muslim converts, a mission he said had been prompted by discussions with a London-based 
shaykh whose bodyguards had families in Montana. 520 KSM also stated that he tasked Majid 
Khan with attending Muslim conferences in the United States to “spot and assess potential 
extremists” who would assist in the gas station plot. 521 In June 2003, KSM admitted that he 
fabricated the story about Abu Issa al-Britani and Montana, explaining that he was “under 
‘enhanced measures’ when he made these claims and simply told his interrogators what he 
thought they wanted to hear.” 522 In August 2003, KSM reiterated that he had no plans to recruit 
or use “black American Muslim” converts operationally. 523 In December 2005, he denied ever 
asking Majid Khan to recruit converts or attend Islamic conferences. 524 



On March 24, 2003, KSM underwent his fifteenth and final 
documented waterboarding session due to his “intransigence” in failing to identify suspected 
Abu Bakr al-Azdi operations in the United States, and for having “lied about poison and 
biological warfare programs.” 525 KSM was described in the session as being “composed, stoic, 
and resigned.” 526 



That evening, the detention site received two reports. The first 
recounted the reporting of Majid Khan, who was still in the custody of a foreign government, on 
Uzhair, who ran the New York branch of his father’s Karachi-based import-export business, and 
on Uzhair’ s father. 527 According to Khan, his meetings with the two were facilitated by Ammar 
al-Baluchi. 528 The second report described the reporting of Iyman Faris, who was in FBI 
custody, on a plot to cut the suspension cables on the Brooklyn Bridge and exploration of plans 
to derail trains and conduct an attack in Washington, D.C. 529 KSM, whom detention site 
personnel described as “boxed in” by the new reporting, 530 then stated that Uzhair’ s father, Sayf 
al-Rahman Paracha, had agreed to smuggle explosives into the United States. 531 As described 




518 



10941 (221506Z MAR 03); ■■■ 10950 (222127Z MAR 03). One cable from DETENTION 

SITE BLUE hypothesized that KSM was lying in order to force the CIA interrogators to apply the CIA’s enhanced 
inteirogation techniques: “[T]he enhanced measures resulting from his lying in [sic] details could be a resistance 
strategy to keep the interrogation from threatening issues. . . [KSM’s] apparent willingness to provoke and incur the 
use of enhanced measures may represent a calculated strategy to either: (A) redirect the course of the interrogation; 
or (BU^ttempt to cultivate some doubt that he had knowledge of any current or future operations against the US.” 
See 10950 (222127Z MAR 03). 

10950 (222127Z MAR 03) 

1094^22^10^MAR 03), disseminated as 10948 (222101Z MAR 03), 

disseminated as 

10942 (221610Z MAR 03), disseminated as HHHiiHH 
12095 (222049Z JUN 03) 

12558 (041938Z AUG 03) 

31148 (17191 9Z DEC 05); \ 

10983 (242321Z MAR 03); 

10974 (241834Z MAR 03); 



31147 ( 171919Z DEC 05), disseminated as 
10972 (241 122Z MAR 03) 

10983 (242321Z MAR 03) 

See the sections of this summary and Volume II on the Identification and Arrests of Uzhair and Saifullah 

Paracha. 

13890 10984 (24235 1Z MAR 03) 

| (242226ZMAR03TB|^Hl0983 (242321Z MAR 03) 

10983 (24232 1Z MAR 03) 

10984 (24235 1Z MAR 03), disseminate^^ 

ini 1 n ( in i mi mu i 

Page 92 of 499 







UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



elsewhere in this summary, the purported parties to the agreement denied that such an agreement 
existed. 532 In confirming Faris’s reporting, KSM exhibited what the Interagency Intelligence 
Committee on Terrorism would later describe as an effort to “stay obvious/general” and “provide 
little information that might enable the US to thwart attacks.” 533 



With the exception of sleep deprivation, which continued for one 
more day, the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against KSM stopped abruptly 
on March 24, 2003. 534 There are no CIA records directing the interrogation team to cease using 



the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against KSM, nor any contemporaneous 
documentation explaining the decision. 535 



4. After the Use of the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Against KSM Ends , the 
CIA Continues to Assess That KSM Is Withholding and Fabricating Information 



(TS^dl On April 3, 2003, the Interagency Intelligence Committee on 
Terrorism produced an assessment of KSM’s intelligence entitled, “Precious Truths, Surrounded 
by a Bodyguard of Lies.” The assessment concluded that KSM was withholding or lying about 
terrorist plots and operatives targeting the United States. It also identified contradictions 
between KSM’s reporting on CBRN and other sources. 536 

(TS//H|^^^^^^^NF) O n April 24, 2003, FBI Director Robert Mueller began seeking 
direct FBI access to KSM in order to better understand CIA reporting indicating threats to U.S. 
cities. 537 Despite personal commitments from DCI Tenet to Director Mueller that access would 
be forthcoming, the CIA’s CTC successfully formulated a CIA position whereby the FBI would 



532 According to one cable, KSM did not volunteer the purported smuggling plot, but rather was asked about it by 



interrogators. (See ALEC | 



(052230Z MAY 03). All part ies to the purported plot - Paracha and Ammaral- 

18192 9Z JUN 03), disseminated as Hi 
13588 (171505Z JUL 03 ); 

39239 



Baluchi - denied any agreement had been r eached. DIRECTOR 

39239 (30160 0Z MAY 03); 

DIRECTO^^(BB(181929Z JUN 03), disseminated as 

(301600Z MAY 03); ALEC |HH (012248Z APR 03).) With regard to the explosives smuggling reporting, the 
former chief of the Bin Ladin Unit wrote in a March 2003 email: “again, anodier ksm op worthy of the lamentable 
knuckleheads... why ‘smuggle’ in explosives when you can get them here? neither fertilizer for bombs or regular 
explosives are that hard to come by. ramzi yousef came to conus with a suitcase and hundred bucks an^ot 
everything he needed right here, this may be true, but it j ust seems damn odd to me.” See email from : HB 

” ~ |; subject: see 



highlight: again, another ksm op worthy of the lamentable; date: March 25, 2003, at 6:29:08 AM. 



533 



10985 (242351Z MAR 03). “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, 
Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT, April 3, 2003. 

534 Sleep deprivation was extended for an additional day, although it was interrupted by “catnapping.” See HMStfM 
10999 (260835Z MAR 03). 

535 For additional details, see KSM detainee review in Volume III. 

536 “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT, 
April 3, 2003. 




537 Email from: 

Jose Rodriguez; | 

date: April 24, 2003, at 10:59:53 AM. 

TOP SECRET// 



; cc: James L. Pavitt; | 



I; John H. Moseman; 



; subject: Mueller’s Interest in FBI Access to KSM; 

/NOFORN 



Page 93 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQFORN 



not be provided access to KSM until his anticipated transfer to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Neither 
the CIA nor the FBI knew at the time that the transfer would not occur until September 2006. 538 

Between April 2003 and July 2003, KSM frustrated the CIA on a 
number of fronts. On May 7, 2003, after more than two months of conflicting reporting, ALEC 
Station concluded that KSM “consistently wavers” on issues of UBL’s location, protectors, and 
hosts, and that his information “conveniently lack[s] sufficient detail [to be] actionable 
intelligence.” 539 On June 12, 2003, CIA Headquarters indicated that it “remained] highly 
suspicious that KSM is withholding, exaggerating, misdirecting, or outright fabricating 
information on CBRN issues.” 540 At the end of April 2003, KSM was shown pictures of the 
recently captured Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash, after which he provided additional 
information related to their plotting in Karachi. 541 ALEC Station wrote in a May 20, 2003, cable 
that “[w]e consider KSM’s long-standing omission of [this] information to be a serious concern, 
especially as this omission may well have cost American lives had Pakistani authorities not been 
diligent in following up on unrelated criminal leads that led to the capture of Ammar, bin Attash, 
and other probable operatives involved in the attack plans.” 542 

In May and June 2003, Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash 
provided reporting that contradicted KSM’s statements about the Heathrow Airport plotting and 
included information that KSM had not p rovided. 543 After KS M was confronted with this 
reporting, Deputy Chief of ALEC Station wrote in an email, “OK, that’s it... 

yet again he lies and ONLY ADMITS details when he knows we know them from someone 



538 MemorandumforJames L. Pavitt; Jose Rodriguez; 

from: subject: Update: Directoi^uellei^DCO’enet Conversation on KSM; date: June 4, 200 3, 

aU)5^47^32 PM. Note for: James L. Pavitt; from: cc: ^ ose Rodriguez, U[ 

HHMH ; subject: Director Mueller Plans to Call DCI on KSM Issue; date: May 21, 2003, at 08:40:22 PM. In 
addition to the FBI, senior CIA officers, including CTC’s representatives to the FBI, complained about the 
limitations on the dissemination of intelligence derived from CIA interrogations and the impact those limitations had 
on counterterrorism analysis. The CTC’s representative to the F BI described this to the OIG as a “serio us concern.” 
He stated that the compartmentation of interrogation information resulted in 

delays in dissemination that could result in information being “missed.” He also stated that the CIA’s 
compartmentation of information prevente^miHroiT^roviding JotheFBI^some insight into the value/credibility 
of intelligence reports.” ( See interview of b y IHHHft Office of the Inspector General, 

August 18, 2003.) Among the other CIA officers expressing these concerns were the deputy chief of CTC’s Al- 
Qa’ida Department, who told the OIG that limited acces^^perational traffic “has had an impact on [analysts’] full 
knowledge of activities, and thus their analysis.” ( See Memorandum for the Record; subject: 

Meeting with Deputy Chief, Counterterrorism Center Al-Qa’ida Department; July 28, 2003.) The Director of 
Analysis at CTC described analysts’ limited access to information as a “continuing problem.” ( See August 18, 

2003, Memorandum for the Record, meeting with Counterterrorism Center, Director of Analysis, Office of the 
Inspector General.) The CIA’s Deputy Director of Intelligence told the OIG that limitations on the dissemination of 
operational information prevented the “full cadre of analysts” from reviewing the intelligence and t hat, as a result, 
“we’re losing analytic ability to look at [foreign intelligence] in a timely manner.” See interview of^m^l 
mm by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, September 12, 2003. 

539 ALEC ^HB(072002Z MAY 03) 

540 DIRECTO RBMB 021 550Z JUN 0 3) 

541 ^^■■11454 (301710Z APR 03); 11448 (301141Z APR 03) 

542 ALECjHH (0220 12Z MAY 03). See information in this summary and Volume II on the “Karachi Plot” for 
additional information. 

543 See detainee reviews for Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash in Volume III for additional information on 

the reporting the detainees provided. 

mi M iii i 

Page 94 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET - // 



//NQF Q R N 



else.” 544 On April 19, 2003, KSM was questioned for the first time about summer 2002 
reporting from Masran bin Arshad, who was in the custody of a foreign government, regarding 
the “Second Wave” plot. Informed that bin Arshad had been detained, KSM stated, “I have 
forgotten about him, he is not in my mind at all.” 545 In response, ALEC Station noted that it 
“remain[e]d concerned that KSM’s progression towards full debriefing status is not yet apparent 
where it counts most, in relation to threats to US interests, especially inside CONUS.” 546 In June 
2003, almost three months after the CIA had stopped using its enhanced interrogation techniques 
against KSM, senior ALEC Station and RDG officers met at least twice to discuss concerns 
about KSM’s lack of cooperation. 547 As an ALEC Station cable noted at the time, “KSM’s 
pattern of behavior over the past three months, trying to control his environment, lying and then 
admitting things only when pressed that others have been caught and have likely admitted the 
plot, is a cause for concern.” 548 In an email, one CIA officer noted that “what KSM’s doing is 
fairly typical of other detainees... KSM, Khallad [bin Attash], and others are doing what makes 
sense in their situation - pretend cooperation.” 549 

In the fall of 2003, after KSM’s explanations about how to decrypt 
phone numbers related to British operative Issa al-Britani (KSM did not identify the operative as 
“Issa al-Hindi,” or by his true name, Dhiren Barot) yielded no results, and after KSM 
misidentified anoth er individual, known not to be Issa, as Issa, Deputy Chief of ALEC Station 
WHKK/tKKKU stated in an email that KSM was “obstructing our ability to acquire good 
information,” noting that KSM “misidentifie[s] photos when he knows we are fishing” and 
“misleads us on telephone numbers.” 550 Later, after KSM’s transfer to DETENTION SITE 
BLACK, ALEC Station wrote that KSM “may never be fully forthcoming and honest” on the 
topic of UBL’s whereabouts. 551 Despite repeated challenges, KSM maintained that he lacked 
information on UBL’s location. 552 



544 Memorandum for: 

Ac tion detainee branch; date: June 12, 2003 (emphasis in th e original). 
J 1319 (191445Z APR 03), disseminated as 
(2221 53Z APR 03) 



I; from: 




; cc: 



|; subject: 



, [REDACTED], 




, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

|, [REDACTED], 

|, [REDACTED]; subject: Khallad & KSM Detainee Case Discussion; date: June 18, 2003, at 10:09 AM; 
302258Z JUN 03). 

(302258Z JUN 03) 

; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], | 




ALEC 

548 ALEC 

549 Email from: 




[REDACTED], 



|, [REDACTED]; subject: Re: KSM’s passive restraint - please let me know if you 



have comments for a memo to the DCI; date: June 24, 2003, at 1:27:06 PM. 
550 Email from: 




; subject: KSM and Khallad Issues; 



date: October 16, 2003, at 5:25:13 PM. 




551 ALEC 

552 



(111932Z NOV 03) 

10400 (161754Z NOV 03). KSM, who was with Ayman al-Zawahiri the day before his March 1, 



2003, capture, first informed the CIA of this fact more than a month later, on April 3, 2003. See \ 
(051956Z APR 03). 

1(11 II III 

Page 95 of 499 



11139 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SE C RET// 



// NOFOR N 



KSM was transferred to DETENTION SITE on 

|- 2005, 553 to DETENTION SITE BROWN on March 2006, 554 and to U.S. military detention 
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, on September 5, 2006. 555 The CIA disseminated 831 intelligence 
reports from the interrogations of KSM over a period of 3.5 years. While KSM provided more 
intelligence reporting than any other CIA detainee (nearly 15 percent of all CIA detainee 
intelligence reporting), CIA records indicate that KSM also received the most intelligence 
requirements and attention from CIA interrogators, debriefers, analysts, and senior CIA 
leadership. Further, as noted, a significant amount of the disseminated intelligence reporting 
from KSM that the CIA identified as important threat reporting was later identified as 
fabricated. 556 



H. The Growth of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 

7. Fifty-Three CIA Detainees Enter the CIA ’s Detention and Interrogation Program in 2003 

(TS//j|^^H|||||||^^^^NF) While the CIA held detainees from 2002 to 2008, early 2003 was 
the most active period of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. Of the 119 detainees 
identified by the Committee as held by the CIA, 53 were brought into custody in 2003, and of the 
39 detainees the Committee has found to have been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, 17 were subjected to such techniques between January 2003 and 
August 2003. The CIA’s enhanced interrogations during that time were primarily used at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT and DETENTION SITE BLUE. 557 Other interrogations using the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques took place at a CIA in Country at which 

at least one CIA detainee was submerged in a bathtub filled with ice water. 558 

In 2003, CIA interrogators sought and received approval to use the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against at least five detainees prior to their arrival at a 
CIA detention facility. 559 In two of those cases, CIA Headquarters approved the use of the CIA’s 




2218 



|; HEADQUARTERS 



1 2214 (050539Z SEP 06) 

556 See KSM detainee review in Volume IIL 

557 For more information, see detainee reviews and reports in Volume III for Ramzi bin al-Shibh, Muhammad Umar 
‘Abd al-Rahman aka Asadallah, Abu Khalid, Khalid Shaykh Mohammad, Mustafa Ahmad al-Hawsawi, Abu Yasir 
al-Jaza’iri, Suleiman Abdullah, Abu Hazim, Al-Shara’iya aka Abd al-Karim, Ammar al-Baluchi, Khallad bin Attash, 
Laid Ben Dohman Saidi aka Abu Hudhaifa, Majid Khan, Mohd Farik bin Amin aka Abu Zubair, Samr Hilmi Abdul 
Latif al-Barq, Bashir bin Lap aka Lillie, and Riduan bin Isomuddin aka Hambali. 

558 For example, Abu Hudhaifa was subjected to this technique at the safehouse. {See email from: [REDACTED]; 

to: [REDACTEI^^ubiect^Memo; date^Marcl^D^004.) The incident was reported to the CIA inspector general. 
See email from: to: cc: [REDACTED], | 

HHHIB subiect^u^elcon^t^^arch 17, 2004, at 1 1 :24 AM. See also claims related to the treatment of 
Majid Khan. See Briefing for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 

Implementation of Cent ral Intelligence Agency Secret Det ention a nd Interrogation Program, March 14, 2008. 

559 DIRECTOR (012214Z MAR 0 3); DIRECTOR ■■ (040049Z MAR 0 3); DIR ECTOR ■■ 

(252003Z MAR 03); DIRECTOR (162224Z MAY 03); HEADQUARTE RS ■■ (102352Z SEP 03) 

mu 1 1 1 1 1 ( in i inimi 

Page 96 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 



enhanced interrogation techniques before they were requested by CIA personnel at the detention 
sites. 560 

2. The CIA Establishes DETENTION SITE BLACK in Country | and DETENTION SITE 
VIOLET in Country | 



2003, 



The CIA entered into an agreement wit h the 
dB(in Country | to host a CIA detention facility iij|^^H|^002. : ’ t>1 In 
CIA He adquarters invited the CIA StatioiUi^ountry | to identify ways to support the 
IHm in Country | to “demonstrate to 111111 and the highest levels of the [Country 
government that we deeply appreciate their cooperation and supp ort” for the detention 
>rogram. 562 The Sta tion responded with an $| million “wish list” 

1.563 Headquarters provided the Station with $P million more than was 




requested for the purposes of the 



subsidy. 564 CIA detainees were transferred to 



DETENTION SITE BLACK in Country | in the fall of 2003. 565 



In August 2003, the U.S. ambassador in Country | sought to 
contact State Department officials to ensure that the State Department was aware of the CIA 
detention facility and its “potential impact on our policy vis-a-vis the [Country |] 
government.” 566 The U.S. ambassador was told by the CIA Station that this was not possible, 
and that no one at the State Department, including the secretary of state, was informed about the 
CIA detention facility in Country |. Describing the CIA’s position as “unacceptable,” the 
ambassador then requested a signed document from “at least the President’s National Security 
Advisor” describing the authorities for the program, including a statement that the CIA’s 
interrogation techniques met “legal and human rights standards,” and an explicit order to him not 
to discuss the program with the secretary of state. 567 CIA Headquarters then sought the 
intervention of Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage, who called the U.S. ambassador. 
Deputy Secretary Armitage told the CIA to keep him and the secretary of state informed so that 
they would not be caught unaware when an ambassador raised concerns. 568 



(T£//m^^B||B^/NF) Nearly a year later, in May 2004, revelations about U.S. detainee 
abuses at the U.S. military prison in Abu Ghraib, Iraq, prompted the same U.S. ambassador in 
Country | to seek inform ation on CIA detention standards and interrogation methods. 569 In the 
fall of 2004, when |fl| U.S. ambassador to Country | sought documents authorizing the 
program, the CIA again sought the intervention of Deputy Secretary Armitage, who once again 




(012214Z MAR 03); DIRECTOR 



560 DIRECTOR | 

561 [REDACTED] 60040J 

562 HEADQUARTERS 

563 [REDACTED] 57591 

564 HEADQUARTERS f 

565 Ac cording to a cable from CIA Headquarters, | 

|H,2003. he adquarters r 

566 [REDACTED] 

567 [REDACTED] 



(040049Z MAR 03) 



568 p ma ji from: to: 

Detention Facility; date: Augus^H, 2003. 

569 [REDACTED] 6762 tf^fMAY 04) 

TOP SECRET// 



detainees arrived in Country | 



; subject: Re: DDCI-Armitage call on [Country |] 



// NOFOR N 



Page 97 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



made “strong remarks” to the CIA about how he and the secretary of state were “cut out of the 
NSC [National Security Council] clearance/coordination process” with regard to the CIA 
program. According to CIA records, Armitage also questioned the efficacy of the pro gram an d 
the value of the intelligence derived from the program. 570 While it is unclear how thef^m 
ambassador’s concerns wer e resolved , he later joined the chief of Station in making a 
presentation to Country |’s on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. The 

presentation talking points did not describe the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, but 
represented that “[w]ithout the full range of these interrogation measures, we would not have 
succeeded in overcoming the resistance of [Khalid Shaykh Muhammad] and other equally 
resistant HVDs.” The talking points included many of the same inaccurate representations 571 
made to U.S. policymakers and others, attributing to CIA detainees critical information on the 
“Karachi Plot,” the “Heathrow Plot,” the “Second Wave Plot,” and the “Guraba Cell”; as well as 
intelligence related to Issa al-Hindi, Abu Talha al-Pakistani, Hambali, Jose Padilla, Binyam 
Mohammed, Sajid Badat, and Jaffar al-Tayyar. The presentation also noted that the president of 
the United States had directed that he not be informed of the locations of the CIA detention 
facilities to ensure he would not accidentally disclose the information. 572 



) In a separate country, Country |, the CIA obtained the approval of 
and the political leadership to establish a detention facility before 
informing the U.S. ambassador. 573 As the CIA chief of Station stated in his request to CIA 





nd the 



Headquarters to brief the ambassador, Country |’s 

)robably would ask the ambassador about the CIA deten tion facility. 574 After 

delayed briefing the 

months, to the consternation of the CIA Station, which wanted political approval prior to the 



arrival of CIA detainees. 575 The 
the 

“shocked,” but nonetheless approved. 576 



Country | official outside of 
aware of the facility, was described as 



By mid-2003 the CIA had concluded that its completed, but still 
unused “holding cell” in Country | was insufficient, given the growing number of CIA detainees 
in the program and the CIA’s interest in interrogating multiple detainees at the same detention 
site. The CIA thus sought to build a new, expanded detention facility in the country. 577 The CIA 




to D/CTC, COPS; copied in: email from: 




at 7:40:43 PM. 



570 Lotus No tes message from Chief of Station 
; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], 

'; subject: ADCI Talking Points for Call to DepSec Armitage; date: 

The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “with regard to the Study’s claims that the State Department was ‘cut out’ 
of information relating to the program, the record shows that the Secretary of State, Deputy Secretary of State. . . 
were aware of the sites at the time they were operational.” As detailed throughout the Committee Study, CIA 
records indicate the secretary of state was not informed of the CIA detention site locations. During meetings with 
the CIA in the summer of 2013, the Committee requested, but was not provided, documentary evidence to support 
the assertion in the CIA’s June 2013 Response. 

571 See relevant section s of this summary and Volume II for additional details. 

572 HEADQUARTERS HHiREDACTED] 

573 [REDACTED] 64105 

574 [REDACTED] 30296 

575 See Volume I for additional details. 

576 [REDACTED] 4076 [REDACTED]; [REDACT ED] 32266 [REDACTED] 

577 HEADQUARTERS | 

TOP SECRET// 





^ NOFORN 



Page 98 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



also offered $| million to the to “show ap preciation” for the 

the program . 578 According to a CIA cable, however, the 



support for 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



• Cables and records indicating that CIA detainees who were undergoing or had undergone 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were subjected to rectal rehydration, 
without evidence of medical necessity, and that others were threatened with it; 584 

• Cables noting that groups of four or more interrogators, who required practical 
experience to acquire their CIA interrogation “certification,” were allowed to apply the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques as a group against a single detainee; 585 and 



584 



See 34491 (051400Z MAR 03); Interview of 

[REDACT ED] of the Offic^^h^nspector General, March 27, 

; ema il from: to: [REDACTED]; cc: 

, at 4:51:32 PmT^^^B 12385 (222045Z JUL 03); 
addition to the rectal rehydration or feeding of al-Nashiri, KSM and Majid Khan, described elsewhere, there is at 
leastonerecord of Abu Zubaydah receiving “rectal fluid resuscitation” for “partially refusing liquids.” (See 





[REDACT ED] and 
34575 

date; date: 
In 



10070 



.) Marwan al-Jabbur was subjected to what was originally referred to in a 



cable as an “enema,” but was later acknowledged to be rectal rehydration. (See 



I; email from: 



I; to: 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: TASKING - Fw: 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
date: March 30, 2007; DTS #2007-1502.) 



Ramzi bin al-Shibh, Khallad bin Attash and Adnan al-Libi were threatened with rectal rehydration. (See 

104I5^PI|HH|; ■■■12385 (222045Z JUL 03); email from: 

dlBd^Jsu^ect: Medical Evaluation/Update HB(047); date: March |, 2004.) CIA medical officers discussed 
rectal rehydration as a means of behavior control. As one officer wrote, “[w]hile IV infusion is safe and effective, 
we were impressed with the ancillary effectiveness of rectal infusion on ending the water refusal in a similar case.” 



(See email from: 



|; subject: Re: 



1(048); 



date: February 2004.) The same officer provided a description of the procedure, writing that “[Regarding the 
rectal tube, if you place it and open up the IV tubing, the flow will self regulate, sloshing up the large intestines.” 
Referencing the experience of the medical officer who subjected KSM to rectal rehydration, the officer wrote that, 
“[w]hat I infer is that you get a tube up as far as you can, then open the IV wide. No need to squeeze the bag - let 



(048).) The same 



gravity do the work.” (See email from 




|, and [REDACTED], February 27, 2004, Subject: Re: 
email exchange included a description of a previous ap plication of the techniqu e, in which “we use d the l argest Ewal 
[sic] tube we had.” (See email from: [REDACTED]; to 
^■■1, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: 

2004, at 1 1 :42: 16 PM.) As described in the context of the rectal feeding of al-Nashiri, Ensure was infused into al- 




ii cc: [R EDACTED],! 

(048); date: February 



Nashiri “in a forward-facing position (Trendlenberg) with head lower than torso.” (See 



|1203 (231709Z 



MAY 04).) Majid Kh an’s “lunch tray,” consisting of hummus, pasta with sauce, nuts, and raisins was “pureed” and 
rectally infused. (See 



|3240 (231839Z SEP 04).) The CIA’s June 2013 Response does 
not address the use of rectal feeding with CIA detainees, but defends the use of rectal rehydration as a “well 
acknowledged medical technique.” CIA leadership, including General Counsel Scott Muller and DDO James Pavitt, 
was also alerted to allegations that rectal exams were conducted with “excessive force” on two detainees at 



DETENTION SITE COBALT. CIA attorney 



was asked to follow up, although CIA records do not 



indicate any resolution of the inquiry. CIA records indicate that one of the detainees, Mustafa al-Hawsawi, was later 
diagnosed with chronic hemorrhoids, an anal fissure, and symptomatic rectal prolapse. See email from: 



[REDACTED]; to [REDACTED]; cc: 
from the GC Update this Morning, date: 




|, [REDACTED]; subject: ACTIONS 



|, at 12:15 PM; email from: 



[REDACTED]; cc: 

GC Update this Mo rning; date: 
[REDACTED]; cc: 



[REDACTED ], [REDACTED], [REDAC TED], subject: AC TIONS from the 
" I, at 1:23:31 PM; email from: 



|, [REDACTED]; subject: Re: ACTIONS from the GC Update this Momint 



REQUEST FOR ST ATUS UPDATE; date: Dece mber j 2003, at 10:47:32 AM; | 
HEADQUARTERS 



585 See, for example, 
(201 133Z MAY 03); 




38584 

38161 



TOP SECRET/, 



Page 100 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NQF Q RN 



• Cables reve aling that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were used at CIA 
that were not designated as CIA detention sites. 586 

In the first half of 2003, the CIA interrogated four detainees with 
medical complications in their lower extremities: two detainees had a broken foot, one detainee 
had a sprained ankle, and one detainee had a prosthetic leg. 587 CIA interrogators shackled each 
of these detainees in the standing position for sleep deprivation for extended periods of time until 
medical personnel assessed that they could not maintain the position. The two detainees that 
each had a broken foot were also subjected to walling, stress positions, and cramped 
confinement, despite the note in their interrogation plans that these specific enhanced 
interrogation techniques were not requested because of the medical condition of the detainees. 588 
CIA Headquarters did not react to the site’s use of these CIA enhanced interrogation techniques 
despite the lack of approval. 

Over the course of the CIA program, at least 39 detainees were 
subjected to one or more of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 589 CIA records 
indicate that there were at least 17 CIA detainees who were subjected to one or more CIA 
enhanced interrogation techniques without CIA Headquarters approval. This count includes 
detainees who were approved for the use of some techniques, but were subjected to unapproved 
techniques, as well as detainees for whom interrogators had no approvals to use any of the 
techniques. This count also takes into account distinctions between techniques categorized as 
“enhanced” or “standard” by the CIA at the time they were applied. 590 The 17 detainees who 



(131326Z MAY 03); 
(121709Z MAY 03). 
586 See, for example, 



38595 (20 121 6Z MAY 03); | 



38126 




[REDACT ED]; subject: Memo; date: 
MAY 03); ' 

MAY 03); 



M 39098 
MAY 03); email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

H 39101 BHI 

39077 (271719Z 




35341 
39042 

|; 2005-8085-IG^i 
37708 (051225Z MAY 03); 

39099 (281101Z MAY 03). 

587 For more details, see detainee reviews for Muhammad Umar ‘Abd al-Rahman aka Asadallah; Abu Hazim al-Libi; 
Al-Shara’iya aka Abd al-Karim; and Khallad bin Attash. 

588 The two detainees were Abu Hazim al-Libi and Al-Shara’iya aka Abd al-Karim. 

589 This is a conservative estimate. CIA records suggest that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques may have 

also been used against five additional detainees at DETENTION SITE COBALT in 2002, which would bring the 
number of CIA detaineessubiectedtot^ interrogation techniques to 44. Those additional 

detainees were [DETAINEE R], who was approved for th e CIA’s enhanced 

interrogation techniques, but whose records do not refer to the use of the techniques (ALEC m (BBMMEBH 
H )); Avub Murshid Ali Salih and Ha’il Aziz Ahmad Al-Maythali, whose records refer to a lack of sleep, but not the 

[28132 (101143Z OCT 02); 



application of sleep deprivation (| 

27964 (071949Z OCT 02)); Bashir Nasir Ali al-Marwalah, who later told debriefers that, when he was first 
captured, he “had to stand up for five days straight and answer questions” and “was also forced to strip naked and 



stand in front of a female interrogator” (| 



14353 (231521Z APR 03)); and Sa’id Salih Sa’id, 



who later told de briefers t hat h e was “mistreated and bea ten by Americans while blind-folded and stripped down to 
his underwear in ■■ 



” See 



13386 (0901 54Z JAN 03)). See also detainee reviews in 

Volume III for more information. 

590 The CIA’s June 2013 Response objects to the Committee’s count, arguing that “[n]o more than seven detainees 
received enhanced techniques prior to written Headquarters approval.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response then asserts 
that “the Study miscounts because it confu ses the use of standard techniques that did not require prior approval at the 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi him i 

Page 101 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O FORN 



were subjected to techniques without the approval of CIA Headquarters were: Rafiq Bashir al- 
Hami, 591 Tawfiq Nasir Awad al-Bihandi, 592 Hikmat Nafi Shaukat, 593 Lufti al-Arabi al-Gharisi, 594 
Muhammad Ahmad Ghulam Rabbani aka Abu Badr, 595 Gul Rahman, 596 Abd al-Rahim al- 



time they were administered with enhanced techniques that did.” This statement in the CIA’s June 2013 Response is 
inaccurate. First, prior to January 2003, the CIA had not yet designated any technique as a “standard” technique. 
Because sleep deprivation was included in the August 1, 2002, OLC memorandum approving the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Zubaydah, the Committee included, among the 17, CIA detainees 
subjected to sleep deprivation without CIA Headquarters authorization prior to January 2003. In January 2003, 
sleep deprivation under a specific time limit was categorized as a “standard” CIA interrogation technique. Second, 
the January 2003 guidelines state that advance CIA Headquarters approval was required for “standard” techniques 
“whenever feasible.” For this reason, the Committee did not include cases where CIA interrogators failed to obtain 
authorization in advance, but did acquire approval within several days of initiating the use of the “standard” 
techniques. Finally, water dousing was not characterized as a “standard” technique until June 2003. ( See 



DIRECTOR 
JAN 03); 




211518ZJUN 03); DIRECTOR | 



| (302126Z JAN 03); DIRECTOR 



(311702Z 



39582 (041743Z JUN 03).) In numerous cases prior to June 2003, water 



dousing was explicitly described in CIA cables as an “enhanced” interrogation technique. (See, for example, 
DIRECTOR (101700Z FEB 03).) The Committee thus included, among the 17, CIA detainees subjected to 

water dousing prior to June 2003 without CIA Headquarters authorization. The distinction between standard and 
enhanced interrogation techniques, which began in January 2003, was eliminated by CIA leadership in 2005. See 
Volume I and Volume III for additional details. 

591 Rafiq Bashir al-Hami was subjected to 72 hours of sl eep deprivation between his arriva l at DETENTION S ITE 

COBALT and his October 2002, interrogation. See 28297 mUHIHi- 

592 Tawfiq Nasir Awad al-Bihani was subjected to 72 hours o f sleep deprivation between his arri val at DETENTION 

SITE COBALT and his October 2002, interrogation. See 28462 

593 CIA cables from October 2002 noted that Shaukat w as “tired from his regimen of limited sleep deprivation.” See 

29381 

594 Lufti al-Arabi al-Gharisi underwent at least two 48-hour sessions of sleep deprivation in October 2002. See 



29036 1 

595 Abu Badr was subj ected to forced standing 
November 2002. See I “““ k 



attention 
129963 



29352 | 

grasps, and cold temperatures without blankets in 




596 CIA interrogators used sleep deprivation, facial slap, use of cold (including cold c ells and cold showers), “hard 
takedo wns,” dietary manipulation, nudity , and light deprivation on Gul Rahman. See 
29520 
29770 

2° 02 p 

of Operations, from | 

Inspector General, Report of Investigation, Death of a Detainee | 

CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention And Interrogation Activities (September 2001 - 
October 2003), May 7, 2004. 

mi 1 'ii i iii' 1 1' n mi nm i 

Page 102 of 499 



|29520 

| interview of [CIA OFFICER 1], December 19, 

Interview of H ammond DUNBAR, January 9, 2003; Memorandum for Deputy Director 
|, January 28, 2003, Su bject: Death In vestigation - Gul RAHMAN; CIA 

(2003-7402-IG), April 27, 2005; and 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



Nashiri, 597 Ramzi bin al-Shibh, 598 Asadallah, 599 Mustafa al-Hawsawi, 600 Abu Khalid, 601 Laid bin 
Duhman aka Abu Hudhaifa, 602 Abd al-Karim, 603 Abu Hazim, 604 Sayyid Ibrahim, 605 Abu Yasir 
al-Jaza’iri, 606 and Suleiman Abdullah. 607 In every case except al-Nashiri, the unauthorized 



597 Abd al-Raliim al-Nashiri was subjected to unapproved nudity and approximately two-and-a-half days of sleep 

deprivation in December 200 2, with his arms shackled ov er hi s head for as long as 1 6 hours. See email from: 
[DETENTION S ITE BLUE] to: subject: EYES ONLY - 

[^■■■^1] ONLY - MEMO FOR ADDO/DDO; date: January 22, 2003. 

598 The facial hold was used against Ramzi bin al-Shibh multiple times without approval. See 1 5 

10429 (101215Z FEB 03); 10573 (241143Z FEB 03)~^^H 10582 

(242026Z FEB 03); ■^H10591 (252002Z FEB 03); 10602 (262020Z FEB 03); 10633 

(01 1537Z MAR 03)|and^|^| 10704 (071239Z MAR 03). 

599 Interrogators used water dousing, nudity, and cramped confinement on Asadallah without having sought or 
received authorization from CIA Headquarters. Bathing detainees did not require authorization by CIA 
Headquarters; however, as described in CIA cables, the application of “bathing” in the case of Asadallah was done 
punitively and was used as an interrogation technique. Nudity was also used in conjunction with water^^^^^^^ 
dousing/bathing and late^^rmntenogation technique^ithou^pprovd from CI^Headquarters^See 
■UliH 34241 ^^■■H; and {^■■■^■^■34310 

600 Mustafa al-Hawsa wi was subjected to water dousing without approval from CIA Headquarters. See 
HHHHHI (081207Z APR 03). 

601 Interrogators used sleep deprivation against A bu Khalid prior to seeking a uthorization from CIA Headquarters, 

and then failed to obtain such auth orization. See 35193 an ^ 

35341 Aim I li 1I11I Iml In 111 in CIA custody for 17 days prior to 

the use of the technique. Advance authorization from CIA Headquarters was therefore “feasible,” and thus required 
under the guidelines. 

602 Abu Hudhaifa was subjected to baths in which ice water was used, standing sleep deprivation for 66 hours that 

was discontinued due to a swollen leg attributedUmjjrolongec^anding^ ( See email 

from: ■■■Hi; to: [REDACTED], ■■■■■, ■■■■■. ■■■■ and ■■ 

; subject: our telecom; date^March^^^004^IAOfficeofInspectoi^eneral Report; 2005-8085-IG; 

39098 39042 MAY 

39101 HIHmAY 03).). No request or approval for the use of standard or 
enhanced interrogation techniques could be located in CIA records. 

603 Abd al-Karim, who suffered from a foot injury incurred during his capture, was subjected to cramped 

confinement, stresspositions, and walling despite CIA Headquarters Jiavin^io^pproved their use. See 
DIRECTOR ■■ ^HHmAY 03); and DIRECTOR iHHHHl- 

604 Abu Hazim, who also had a foot injury incur red during his capture, was subjected to walling, despite CIA 

Headquarters having not ap proved its use. ( See 36908 and 

37410 (291828Z APR 03).) Nudity^dietaryman^ facial grasp were used on 

Abu Hazim at least 13 days prior to receiving approval. See 37411 (291829Z APR 03); 

374 10 (291828Z APR 03); ■HH||^^HB37493 

DIRECTOR^HHHiMAY 03). 

605 CIA cables indicate that Sayyid Ibrahim was subjected to sleep deprivation from January 27^004, to January 30, 
2004, which exceeded the 48 hoursapproved by CI^Headquar ter s . See HEADQUARTER^^^^H (272155Z 
JAN04)JB^B^Jl303j^H|BfejAN04k^||^^BBl298 ■^■lAN 04); ■■■l303 

BHJAN04)HHH^ 

606 During March 2003 interrogations at DETENTION SITE COBALT, Abu Yasir al-Jaza’iri was “bathed,” a term 
used to describe water dous ing, w hich was co nsidered at the time to be an enhanced interrogation technique. (See 

35558 ■■ MAR 03).) Water dousing had not been approved, and the subsequent 
request, by DETENTION S ITE BLUE , to us e the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on al-Jaza’iri, did not 
include water dousing. See 10990 ■■■■HB 

607 Interrogators requested approvals to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Suleiman Abdullah, 

including water dousing. C IA He adquarters then appr oved other techniques, but not water dousing. (See 
jjjgg HMHBH 36559 ■■■■■; DIRBCrORHH^^HHH.) Suleiman 
Abdullah was nonetheless subjected to water dousing. See 371 17 



Page 103 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
































UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



interrogation techniques were detailed in CIA cables, but CIA Headquarters did not respond or 
take action against the CIA personnel applying the unauthorized interrogation techniques. 608 

This list does not include examples in which CIA interrogators 
were authorized to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, but then implemented the 
techniques in a manner that diverged from the authorization. Examples include Abu Zubair 609 
and, as detailed, KSM, whose interrogators developed methods of applying the waterboard in a 
manner that differed from how the technique had previously been used and how it had been 
described to the Department of Justice. This count also excludes additional allegations of the 
unauthorized use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 610 

Over the course of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 
numerous detainees were subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques by untrained 
interrogators. As noted, the CIA did not conduct its first training course until November 2002, 
by which time at least nine detainees had already been subjected to the techniques. 611 The DCI’s 
January 28, 2003, guidelines, which stated that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 



608 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the CIA “conducted at least 29 investigations of RDI-related conduct, 
plus two wide-ranging reviews of the program... one involved the death of an Afghan national who was beaten by a 
contractor. The individual involved was prosecuted by the Department of Justice and convicted of a felony charge. 
Another case involved a contractor who slapped, kicked, and struck detainees while they were in military custody. 

. . . [T]he contractor was terminated from the CIA, had his security clearances revoked, and was placed on a 
contractor watch list.” However, the two specific examples provided in the CIA’s June 2013 Response refer to 
detainees who were never part of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. On November 6, 2013, the CIA 
provided a list of “IG Investigations Concerning Detention, Interrogations, and Renditions.” The list of 29 included 
14 investigations that were directly related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. Four additional 
investigations were related to detainees who claimed they had been subjected to abuse in transit from CIA custody 
to U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay. The remaining 1 1 investigations were unrelated to the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Pr ogram. See DT S #2013-3250. 

~~ |, placed a broomstick behind the knees of Zubair when Zubair was in a 

Although stress positions had been approved for Zubair, the use of the 
broomstick was not approved. See April 7, 2005, Briefing for Blue Ribbon Panel, CIA Rendition, Detention, and 
Interrogation Programs, at 22. 

610 Majid KhaiGiaj^lainra 2003, he was subjected to immersion in a tub that was filled with ice and 

water. ( See Briefing for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Implementation 

of Central Intelligence Agency Secret Detention and Interrogation Prog ram, dated Mar ch 14, 2008.) While CIA 
cables do not confirm bathing or water dousin g, Chief of Interrogations 
an (unauthorized) “icy water” bath at the same 

|; to: [R EDACTED], [RE DACTED], 

~ Land email from: [REDACTED] 



609 CIA chief of interrogations, 
stress position on his knees on the floor 



|, subjected Abu Hudhaifa to 



where Ma j id Khan was hel d. ( See email from: | 

and I 



our telecon; date: 
subject: Memo; date: 






subject: 



) Ayub Murshid Ali Salih and Ha’il Aziz Ahmad al-Maythali were described 



as not having slept, although it is unclear from CIA records whether CIA interrogators kept them awake. (See 



|28132 (101 143Z OCT 02) and 



|27964 (071949Z OCT 02).) 



Bashir Nasri Ali al-Marwalah told debriefers at Guantanamo Bay that he was “tortured” at DETENTION SITE 



COBALT with five days of continual standing and nudity. (See 



14353 (231521Z APR 



03).) Sa’id Sa lih Sa’id likewise inform ed debriefers at Guantanamo that he was “beaten” while blind-folded in CIA 
custody. (See 



13386 (090154Z JAN 03).) Sixteen other detainees were held at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT between September and December 2002, a period during which exposure to the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques such as sleep deprivation and nudity cannot be determined based on the 
lack of details in CIA cables and related documents. 

611 December 4, 2002, Training Report, High Value Target Interrogation and Exploitation (HVTIE) Training 
Seminar 12-18 Nov 02 (pilot running). 

I HI 1 Mil III' III! mil I 



Page 104 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



//NQF Q R N 



“may be employed only by approved interrogators for use with specific detainees,” raised the 
additional issue of approved techniques used by unapproved interrogators. 612 The January 28, 
2003, DCI guidelines did not explicitly require CIA Headquarters to approve who could use the 
CIA’s “standard” interrogation techniques, including techniques that were not previously 
considered “standard” and that would later be reclassified as “enhanced” interrogation 
techniques. Rather, the DCI guidelines required only that “all personnel directly engaged in the 
interrogation” be “appropriately screened,” that they review the guidelines, and that they receive 
“appropriate training” in the implementation of the guidelines. 613 

4. CIA Headquarters Authorizes Water Dousing Without Department of Justice Approval; 

Application of Technique Reported as Approximating Waterboarding 

CIA Headquarters approved requests to use water dousing, nudity, 
the abdominal slap, and dietary manipulation, despite the fact that the techniques had not been 
reviewed by the Department of Justice. 614 Interrogators used the water dousing technique in 
various ways. At DETENTION SITE COBALT, detainees were often held down, naked, on a 
tarp on the floor, with the tarp pulled up around them to form a makeshift tub, while cold or 
refrigerated water was poured on them. 615 Others were hosed down repeatedly while they were 
shackled naked, in the standing sleep deprivation position. These same detainees were 
subsequently placed in rooms with temperatures ranging from 59 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit. 616 



302126Z JAN 03); DIRECTOR (31 1702Z JAN 03). For example, on May |, 

applied three facial attention grabs, five facial insult slaps, and three 




612 DIRECTOR 
2003, CIA interrogator 
abdominal slaps to Abd al-Karim, under the supervision of CIA interrogator | 



37821 



[CIA OFFICER 1]. 

| had not been approved by CIA Headquarters 



to employ the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on al-Karim; approval had only be en provided for 
[CIA OFFICER 1] to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. ( See DIRECTOR 



.) On 



|, CIA interrogator! 



|, under the supervision of | 



I, conducted an 



interrogation of Abd al-Kar im in which interrogators us ed the facial attention grab, facial insult slap, and abdominal 
al-Karim. (See 38583 ^^^^Hhad not been 



slap against al-Karim. ( See 38583 

approved by CIA He adquarters to e mploy the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abd al-Karim. In 
another examp le, on 

mmmm and 

Khallad bin Attash, and for three other interrogators, 

also use the techniques “under the direct supervision of senior certified interrogator 




DETENTION SITE COBALT requested approval for certified interrogators 
[CIA OFFICER 1] to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against 




38325 



I.) Later that day, CIA Headquarters approved the use of CIA’s enhanced 



interrogation techniques against Khallad bin Attash, but the approval cable did not include approval for participation 



by 

03).) On May 17 and 18, 2003, 
Attash under the su pervision of 
water dousing. See 
(201225Z MAY 03). 

6,3 DIRECTOR ■■ 




’s supervision. (See DIRECTOR 






(162224Z MAY 



used the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on bin 
|, including facial grabs, facial insult slaps, abdominal slaps, wal ling, and 

3g597 



38557 (191641Z MAY 03); | 

H (31 1702Z JAN 03). The DCI guidelines provided 



■ (302126Z JAN 03); DIRECTOR ■ 
no further information, other than to note that the screening should be “from the medical, psychological, and 
security standpoints.” 



614 



See, for example, DIRECTOR j 



(101700Z FEB 03). 



615 In the case of Abu Hudhaifa, and allegedly Majid Khan, interrogators placed the detainee in an actual tub in a 



CIA 



m when employing water dousing that included ice water. 

6,6 CIA cable records often describe the detainees as naked after the water dousing, while other records omit such 
detail. See Volume III for additional infor mation. 

mi i ( iii i ihmii'i 
Page 105 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Other accounts suggest detainees were water doused while placed on a waterboard. 617 Although 
CIA Headquarters approved the use of the “water dousing” interrogation technique on several 
detainees, interrogators used it extensively on a number of detainees without seeking or 
obtaining prior authorization from CIA Headquarters. 618 



senior CIA interrogator 



c ) In interrogati on sessions on April 5, 2003, and April 6, 2003, 
and another interrogator used the water dousing 
technique on detainee Mustafa al-Hawsawi at DETENTI ON SITE COB ALT. Al-Hawsawi later 

who wrote that al- 



described the session to a different CIA interrogator, HHHHIH 
Hawsawi might have been waterboarded or subjected to treatment that “could be 
indistinguishable from the waterboard.” 619 An email from the interrogator stated that: 



“We did not prompt al-Hawsawi - he described the process and the table on 
his own. As you know, I have serious reservations about watering them in a 
prone position because if not done with care, the net effect can approach the 
effect of the water board. If one is held down on his back, on the table or on 
the floor, with water poured in his face I think it goes beyond dousing and the 
effect, to the recipient, could be indistinguishable from the water board. 



I have real problems with putting one of them on the water board for ‘dousing.’ 
Putting him in a head down attitude and pouring water around his chest and 
face is just too close to the water board, and if it is continued may lead to 
problems for us.” 620 



Several months later, the incident was referred to the CIA inspector 
general for investigation. A December 6, 2006, inspector general report summarized the findings 
of this investigation, indicating that water was poured on al-Hawsawi while he was lying on the 
floor in a prone position, which, in the opinion of at least one CIA interrogator quoted in the 
report, “can easily approximate waterboarding.” 621 The OIG could not corroborate whether al- 
Hawsawi was strapped to the waterboard when he was interrogated at DETENTION SITE 
COBALT. Both of the interrogators who subjected al-Hawsawi to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques on April 6, 2003, said that al-Hawsawi cried out for God while the 



6,7 Email from: 



618 




[REDACTED] account; to: 
; subject: Al-Hawsawi Incident; date: November 21, 2003. 



For additional details, see Volume III. 



619 Email from 




620 Email from 



[REDACTED] account; to: 
; s ubject: Al-Hawsawi Incident ; date: November 21, 2003. 

[REDACTED] account; to: 




|; subject: Al-Hawsawi Incident; date: November 21, 2003. Volume III of the 
Committee Study includes a CIA photograph of a wooden waterboard at DETENTION SITE COBALT. As detailed 
in the full Committee Study, there are no records of the CIA using the waterboard interrogation technique at 
COBALT. The waterboard device in the photograph is surrounded by buckets, with a bottle of unknown pink 
solution (filled two thirds of the way to the top) and a watering can resting on the wooden beams of waterboard. In 
meetings between the Committee staff and the CIA in the summer of 2013, the CIA was unable to explain the details 
of the photograph, to include the buckets, solution, and watering can, as well as the waterboard’ s presence at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT. 

621 CIA OIG Disposition Memorandum, “Alleged Use of Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques” OIG Case 2004- 
7604-IG, December 6, 2006. 

Page 106 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T 



//NOFORN 



water was being poured on him and one of the interrogators asserted that this was because of the 
cold temperature of the water. Both of the interrogators also stated that al-Hawsawi saw the 
waterboard and that its purpose was made clear to him. The inspector general report also 
indicates that al-Hawsawi’ s experience reflected “the way water dousing was done at 
[DETENTION SITE COBALT],” and that this method was developed with guidance from CIA 
CTC attorneys and the CIA’s Office of Medical Services. 622 

during the same time that al-Hawsawi claimed he was placed on 
the waterboard in April 2003, a CIA linguist claimed that CIA de tainee Abu Hazim had also 
been w ater doused i n a w ay that ap proximated waterboarding. 623 a linguist in 

Country^Hm from HBH 2003, until 2003, told the OIG that: 

“when wa ter dousing was used on Abu Hazim, a cloth covered Abu Hazim’ s 
face, and [CIA OFFICER 1]] poured cold water directly on Abu 

Hazim’ s face to disrupt his breathing. [Th^inguist] said that when Abu 
Hazim turned blue, Physician’s Assistant removed the cloth so 

that Abu Hazim could breathe.” 624 

(TS4HH^H^N£) This allegation was reported to the CIA inspector general on 
August 18, 2004. The CIA reported this incident as a possible criminal violation on September 



622 CIA OIG Disposition Memorandum, “Alleged Use of Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques” OIG Case 2004- 
7604-IG, December 6, 2006. 

623 An accusation related to an additional detainee was included in a September 6, 2012, Human Rights Watch report 

entitled, “Delivered Into Enemy Hands.” The report asserts that documents and interviews of former detainees 
contradict CIA claims that “only three men in US custody had been waterboarded.” Specifically, the report states 
that Mohammed Shoroeiya, aka Abd al-Karim, “provided detailed and credible testimony that he was waterboarded 
on repeated occasions during US interrogations in Afghanistan.” According to the report, Mohammed Shoroeiya 
stated that a hood was placed over his head and he was strapped to a “wooden board.” The former CIA detainee 
stated that after being strapped to the waterboard, “then they start with the water pouring... They start to pour water 
to the point where you feel like you are suffocating.” As detailed in the full Committe^tudy, Mohammed 
Shoroeiya, aka Abd al-Karim, was rendered to CIA custody at DETENTION SITE on April 2003. 

While there are no CIA records of Mohammed Shoroeiya, aka Abd al-Karim, being subjected tothewaterboard at 
DETENTION SITE HH, the full nature of the CIA interrogations at DETENTION SITE remains 

largely unknown. Detainees at DETENTION SITE |^flH were subjected to techniques that were not recorded 
in cable traffic, including multiple periods of sleep deprivation, required standing, loud music, sensory deprivation, 
extended isolation, reduced quantity and quality of food, nudity, and “rough treatment.” As described^folume III 
of the Committee Study includes a CIA photograph of a wooden waterboard at DETENTION SITE mHI- As 
detailed in the full C ommittee Study, there are no records of the CIA using the waterboard interrogation technique at 
DETENTION SITE The waterboard device in the photograph is surrounded by buckets, with a bottle of 

unknown pink solution (filled two thirds of the way to the top) and a watering can resting on the wooden beams of 
waterboard. In meetings between the Committee staff and the CIA in the summer of 2013, the CIA was unable to 
explain the details of the photograph^toinclude the buckets, solution, and watering can, as well as the waterboard’ s 
presence at DETENTION SITE 1° response to the allegations in the September 2012 Human Rights 

Watch report, the CIA stated: “The agency has been on the record that there are three substantiated cases in which 
detainees were subjected to the waterboarding technique under the program.” See “Libyan Alleges Waterboarding 
by CIA, Report Says,” New York Times, September 6, 2012. 

624 CIA IG Disposition Memo, “Alleged Use of Unauthorized Techniques,” dated December 6, 2006. 2004-77717- 



16. 



- TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 107 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S E G RET// 



//NQFQRN 



10, 2004, to the U.S. Attorney’s Office in the Eastern District of Virginia. 625 The inspector 
general report concluded that there was no corroboration of the linguist’s allegation, stating, 
“[tfhere is no evidence that a cloth was placed over Abu Hazim’s face during water dousing or 
that his breathing was impaired.” 626 

5. Hambali Fabricates Information While Being Subjected to the CIA ’s Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques 



summer of 2003, the CIA captured three Southeast Asian 
operatives: Zubair, 627 Lillie, 628 and Hambali. (These captures are discussed later in this 
summary in the section entitled, “The Capture of Hambali.”) 629 

In August 2003, Hambali was captured and transferred to CIA 
custody. 630 Despite assessments that Hambali was cooperative in the interview process without 
“the use of more intrusive standard interrogation procedures much less the enhanced measures,” 
CIA interrogators requested and obtained approval to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques on Hambali approximately a month after his transfer to CIA custody 631 In late 2003, 
Hambali recanted most of the significant information he had provided to interrogators during the 
use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, recantations CIA officers assessed to be 
credible. 632 According to a CIA cable: 



625 CIA IG Disposition Memo, “Alleged Use of Unauthorized Techniques,” dated December 6, 2006. 2004-77717- 
16. 

626 CIA IG Disposition Memo, “Alleged Use of Unauthorized Techniques,” dated December 6, 2006. 2004-77717- 




628 




84854 

87617 87426 (1 1 1 223Z AUG 03). Lillie was subjected to the 

CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques almost immediately upon his arrival at DETENTION SITE COBALT, on 
August 2003. H^wa^strippe^nu^lothing,” and “placed in a cell in the standing sleep deprivation position, 
in darkness.” ( See 1242 (151914Z AUG 03).) A day later an interrogation plan for 

Lillie, including the use oftheCIA^senhancedi^rrogation techniques, was submitted to CIA Headquarters on 
August |, 2003. ( See 1243 (152049Z AUG 03).) CIA Headquarters approved the use 

of the CIA’s enhancetHntooeatioi^cliniques on Lillie on the following day, August |, 2003. {See 
HEADQUARTERS IHI (llHiH AUG 03).) As described, the Committee’s count of detainees subjected to 
unauthorized techniques did not include detainees such as Lillie, who were subjected to the CIA’s “standard” 
techniques prior to authorization from CIA Headquarters, but for whom authorization from CIA Headquarters was 
acquired shortly thereafter. As noted, the January 2003 guidelines required advance approval of such techniques 

“w henever feasi ble.” 

■■■ 87617 ■■■§ ■■■ 87414 
|^^H^^HH||[|^^^^^^^pHambali Capture.” For additional details, see Volume II. 



631 AUG 03); 1267 AUG 

The cable also noted that CIA contractor Hammond DUNBAR had arrived at the detention site and was 
participating in Hambali’s interrogations as an interrogator. The “psychological assessment” portion of the cable 
was attributed to a CIA staff psychologist, however, and not to DUNBAR. 

632 CIA officers interrogating Hambali in November 2003 wrote about Hambali’s “account of how, through 
statements read to him and constant repetition of questions, he was made aware of what type of answers his 
questioners wanted. [Hambali] said he merely gave answers that were similar to what was being asked and what he 
inferred the interrogator or debriefer wanted, and when the pressure subsided or he was told that the information he 
gave was okay, [Hambali] knew that he had provided the answer that was being sought.” The cable states, “Base 
assesses [Hambali] 's admission of previou s fabrication to be credible. [Hambali ] ’s admission came after three 

llll II III I — — II H 

Page 108 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP 4 SE€RE 30 



//N Q F Q R N 



“he had provided the false information in an attempt to reduce the pressure on 
himself ... and to give an account that was consistent with what [Hambali] 
assessed the questioners wanted to hear.” 633 



CIA officers later suggested that the misleading answers and 
resistance to interrogation that CIA interrogators cited in their requests to use the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against Hambali and an associated CIA detainee, Lillie, may 
not have been resistance to interrogation, but rather the result of issues related to culture and 
their poor English language skills. 634 



6. After the Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, CIA Headquarters 

Questions Detention of Detainee and Recommends Release; Detainee Transferred to U.S. 
Military Custody and Held for An Additional Four Years 



In October 2003, the CIA interrogated Arsala Khan, an Afghan 
national in his mid-fifties who was believed to have assisted Usama bin Laden in his escape 
through the Tora Bora Mountains in late 200 1. 635 After 56 hours of standing sleep deprivation, 
Arsala Khan was described as barely able to enunciate, and being “visibly shaken by his 
hallucinations depicting dogs mauling and killing his sons and family.” According to CIA 
cables, Arsala Khan “stated that [the interrogator] was responsible for killing them and feeding 
them to the dogs.” 636 

Arsala Khan was subsequently allowed to sleep. 637 Two days later, 
however, the interrogators returned him to standing sleep deprivation. After subjecting Khan to 
21 additional hours of sleep deprivation, interrogators stopped using the CIA’s enhanced 



weeks of daily debriefing sessions with [the case officer] carried out almost entirely in Bahasa Indonesia. [Hambali] 
has consistently warmed to [the case officer’s] discussions with him, and has provided to [the case officer] 
additional information that he had avoided in the past... More tellingly, [Hambali] has opened up considerably to 
[the case officer] about his fears and motivations, and has taken to trusting [the case officer] at his word. [Hambali] 
looks to [the case officer] as his sole confidant and the one person who has [Hambali]’ s interest in mintL^/’Set? 
MUM 1142 (301055Z NOV 03). This cable appears to have been retransmitted the following day as BMNMGBI 
11 44 (0108 23Z DEC 03). 

1 142 (301055Z NOV 03) 




1072 (1 10606Z OCT 03); 
1 158 (081459Z DEC 03); 




1075 (111828Z OCT 03); 



1142 (301055Z NOV 03); 



1604 (191232Z JAN 04). After an Indonesian 



speaker was deployed to debrief Hambali, the debriefer “got the distinct impression [Hambali] was just responding 
‘yes’ in the typical Indonesian cultural manner when they [sic] do not comprehend a question.” The CIA cable then 
noted that, “[j]ust to clarify, [the Indonesian speaking debriefer] then posed the same question in Indonesian,” and 
‘[wjithout pause, [Hambali ] r eplied with a d irect contradiction, claiming that on 20 September 2001, he was in 

1075 (1 1 1 828Z OCT 03).) A January 2004 cable statecLhaCLillitMs of 
limited valu e,” adding that “[h]is English is very poor, and we do not have a Malay linguist.” See 
Wmm 1604 (1 91232Z JAN 04). See also d etainee reviews in Volume 111 for additional information. 

635 WASHINGTON 

1393 (2 01006Z OCT 03). The information was also released in 

CIA records indicate that the CIA’s interrogations of Arsala Khan resulted 
in one disseminated intellige nce report, derived from information Kh an provided the day he exper ienced the 
hallucinations 

637 





, via CIA WASHINGTON DC 
1393 (2010 06Z OCT 03) 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 109 of 499 



//NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TO P- SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



interrogation techniques ”[d|uc to lack of information from [Arsala Khan] pinning him directly 
to a recent activity.” 638 Three days after the reporting about Khan’s hallucinations, and after the 
interrogators had already subjected Khan to the additional 21 hours of standing sleep deprivation 
(beyond the initial 56 hours), CIA Headquarters sent a cable stating that RDG and the Office of 
Medical Services believed that Arsala Khan should not be subjected to additional standing sleep 
deprivation beyond the 56 hours because of his hallucinations. 639 

(TS//H|||^^H^^B^NE) After approximately a month of detention and the extensive use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Arsala Khan, the CIA concluded that the 
"detainee Arsala Khan does not appear to be the subject involved in... current plans or activities 
against U.S. personnel or facilities,” and recommended that he be released to his village with a 
cash payment. 640 CIA interrogators at DETENTION SITE COBALT instead transferred him to 
U.S. military custody, where he was held for an additional four years despite the development of 
significant intelligence indicating that the source who reported that Arsala Khan had aided 
Usama bin Laden had a vendetta against Arsala Khan’s family. 641 

7. A Year After DETENTION SITE COBALT Opens, the CIA Reports “Unsettling Discovery 
That We Are Holding a Number of Detainees About Whom We Know Very Little " 



(TO// 



c ) In the fall of 2003, CIA officers began to take a closer look at the 

CIA detainees being held in Country raising concerns about both the number and types of 
detainees being held by the CIA. CIA officers in Country | provided a list of CIA detainees to 
CIA Headquarters, resulting in the observation by CIA Headquarters that they had not previously 
had the names of all 44 CIA detainees being held in that country. At the direction of CIA 
Headquarters, the Station in Country | “completed an exhaustive search of all available records 
in an attempt to develop a clearer understanding of the l CIA] detainees.” A December 2003 
cable from the Station in Country | to CIA Headquarters stated that: 



“In the process of this research, we have made the unsettling discovery that we 
are holding a number of detainees about whom we know very little. The 
majority of |CIA| detainees in [Country || have not been debriefed for months 
and, in some cases, for over a year. Many of them appear to us to have no 
further intelligence value for | the CIA| and should more properly be turned 
over to the [U.S. military], to [Country || authorities or to third countries for 
further investigation and possibly prosecution. In a few cases, there docs not 
appear to be enough evidence to continue incarceration, and, if this is in fact 
the case, the detainees should be released.” 642 




Page 1 1 0 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 





Records indicate that all of these CIA detainees had been kept in 
solitary confinement. The vast majority of these detainees were later released, with some 
receiving CIA payments for having been held in detention. 643 

8. CIA Detention Sites in Country t | Lack Sufficient Personnel and Translators to Support 
the Interrogations of Detainees 

Throughout 2003, the CIA lacked sufficient personnel and 
adequate translators to conduct debriefings and interrogations in Country |. Because of this 
personnel shortage, a number of detainees who were transferred to CIA custody were not 
interrogated or debriefed by anyone for days or weeks after their arrival at CIA detention 
facilities in Country |. 644 As noted in a cable from the CIA Station in Country |, in April 2003: 

“Station is supporting the debriefing and/or interrogation of a large number of 
individuals... and is constrained by a lack of personnel which would allow us 
to fully process them in a timely manner.” 645 

I. Other Medical, Psychological, and Behavioral Issues 
1. CIA Interrogations Take Precedence Over Medical Care 

While CIA Headquarters informed the Department of Justice in 
July 2002 “that steps will be taken to ensure that [Abu Zubaydah’s] injury is not in any way 
exacerbated by the use of these [enhanced interrogation] methods,” 646 CIA Headquarters 
informed CIA interrogators that the interrogation process would take “precedence” over Abu 
Zubaydah’s medical care. 647 Beginning on August 4, 2002, Abu Zubaydah was kept naked, fed a 
“bare bones” liquid diet, and subjected to the non-stop use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 648 On August 15, 2002, medical personnel described how Abu Zubaydah’s 
interrogation resulted in the “steady deterioration” of his surgical wound from April 2002. 649 On 



643 This included Saved Habib Zarmein (“a nominal payment”), Modin Nik Mohammed ($H), and Ali 

Saeed Awadh ($|HH). See Volume III for additional details. 

644 For detailed information, se e Volume III. 

645 36229 (060943Z APR 03). See also detainee reviews for Lillie, Hambali, Mustafa al- 
Hawsawi, and Suleiman Abdullah. 

646 See Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, 
Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative.” 

647 ALEC ■■ (182321Z JUL 02) 

648 See Abu Zubay dah detainee review in Volume III for additional information, as well as email from: 
[REDACTED], to: ■■■■■■ and [REDACTED], subject: 15 Aug Clinical; date: August 15, 2002, at 06:54 
AM. 

649 An email to OMS stated: “We are currently providing absolute minimum wound care (as evidenced by the steady 

deterioration of the wound), [Abu Zubaydah] has no opportunity to practice any form of hygienic self care (he’s 
filthy), the physical nature of this phase dictates multiple physical stresses (his reaction to today’s activity is I 
believe the culprit for the superioredgeseparation), and nutrition is bare bones (six cans of ensure daily).” See 
email from: [REDACTED], to: HHHHI and [REDACTED], subject: 15 Aug Clinical; date: August 15, 
2002, at 06:54 AM. 




Page 1 1 1 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



August 20, 2002, medical officers wrote that Abu Zubaydah’s wound had undergone 
“significant” deterioration. 650 Later, after one of Abu Zubaydah’s eyes began to deteriorate, 651 
CIA officers requested a test of Abu Zubaydah’s other eye, stating that the request was “driven 
by our intelligence needs vice humanitarian concern for AZ.” The cable relayed, “[w]e have a 
lot riding upon his ability to see, read and write.” 652 

I n April 2003, CIA detainees Abu Hazim and Abd al-Karim each 
broke a foot while trying to escape capture and were placed in casts 653 CIA cables requesting 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on the two detainees stated that the 
interrogators would “forego cramped confinement, stress positions, walling, and vertical 
shackling (due to [the detainees’] injury).” 654 Notwithstanding medical concerns related to the 
injuries, both of these detainees were subjected to one or more of these CIA enhanced 
interrogation techniques prior to obtaining CIA Headquarters approval 655 

In the case of Abu Hazim, on May 4, 2003, the CIA regional 
medical officer examined Abu Hazim and recommended that he avoid all weight bearing 
activities for an additional five weeks due to his broken foot. 656 In the case of Abd al-Karim, on 
April 18, 2003, a CIA physician assistant recommended that al-Karim avoid extended standing 
for “a couple of weeks.” 657 Six days later, on April 24, 2003, CIA Headquarters reviewed x-rays 
of al-Karim’ s foot, diagnosing him with a broken foot, and recommending no weight bearing and 
the use of crutches for a total of three months. 658 Despite these recommendations, on May 10, 



650 



10647 (201 33 1Z AUG 02); 



10654 (21131 8Z AUG 02); 



10679 (250932Z 



11026 (070729Z OCT 02). 



AUG 02) 

651 Recordsindicate that Abu Zubaydah ul timately lost the eye. See 

652 ^^■Hl0679 (25 0932Z AUG 02); 11026 (070729Z O CT 02) 

653 44147 ^^■■^H[^^BlH^^^H^6862(181352Z APR 03) 

36908^^|H^^K^BHlHHHH 36862 APR 

To accommodate Abu Hazim’s and Abd al-Karim’s injuries, the cable stated that, rather than being shackled 
standing during sleep deprivation, the detainees would be “seated, secured to a cell wall, with intermittent 
disruptions of normal sleeping patterns.” For water dousing^he detaineesMniuredlegs would be “wrap ped in 
las tic.” The requests were approved. See DIRECTOR DIRECTOR 



655 With regard to Abu Hazim, on April 24, 2003, an additionalCIAHeadquarters approval cable was sent to 
DETENTION SITE COBALT authorizing interrogator BIHHIHH to use the attention grasp, facial insult 
slap, abdominal slap, water dousing, and slee^^phvatiormipto72ho^; the cable did not approve the use of 
walling or the facial hold. (See DIRECTOR Despite the lack of approval, walling 



was 





used agains t Abu Hazim on April 28-29, 2003, and the facial hold was used on April 27, 2003. (See 
3741 1 (291829Z APR 03); ^■BHHHI^H 37410 (291828Z APR 03); 

37509 (02 1 309^MA^03L^A May 10, 2003, CIA Headquarters cable approved walling and the facial 
grasp. (See DIRECTOR MAY 03).) Abd al-Karim was also subjected to unapproved CIA 

enhanced interrogation techniques that the detention site initially indicated would not be used due to the detainee’s 
injuries. Without approval from CIA Headquarters, CIA interrogators subjected Abd al-Karim to cramped 
confinement on April 19-20 , 2003; stress positions on Apri^^2003^n^walling on April 21, and 29, 2003. (See 

37121 (221703Z APR 03); 37152 (231424Z APR 03); 

37202 (250948Z APR 03); 37508 (021305Z MAY 03).) On 

May 10, 2003, CIA Headquarters approved an expanded list of CIA enhanced interr ogation techniques that could be 
used against Ab d al-Karim, includ ing walling and stress positions. See DIRECTOR MAY 03). 

656 DIRECTOR BB ^BB MAY 03) 

62 (1813 52Z APR 03) 

658 DIRECTOR 1 

ini' 'ii i Hi' ' l ' l|l|(| i ||| i | i'i 

Page 1 12 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T# 



//NOFORN 



2003, CIA interrogators believed that both Hazim and al-Karim were “strong mentally and 
physically due to [their] ability to sleep in the sitting position.” 659 On May 12, 2003, a different 
CIA physician assistant, who had not been involved in the previous examinations determining 
the need for the detainees to avoid weight bearing, stated that it was his “opinion” that Abu 
Hazim’ s and Abd al-Karim’ s injuries were “sufficiently healed to allow being placed in the 
standing sleep deprivation position.” 660 He further reported that he had “consulted with [CIA’s 
Office of Medical Services] via secure phone and OMS medical officer concurred in this 
assessment.” 661 CIA Headquarters approved the use of standing sleep deprivation against both 
detainees shortly thereafter. 662 Asa result, both detainees were placed in standing sleep 
deprivation. Abu Hazim underwent 52 hours of standing sleep deprivation from June 3-5, 

2003, 663 and Abd al-Karim underwent an unspecified period of standing sleep deprivation on 
May 15, 2003. 664 

CIA detainee Asadallah was left in the standing sleep deprivation 
position despite a sprained ankle. Later, when Asadallah was placed in stress positions on his 
knees, he complained of discomfort and asked to sit. Asadallah was told he could not sit unless 
he answered questions truthfully 665 

2. CIA Detainees Exhibit Psychological and Behavioral Issues 



Psychological and behavioral problems experienced by CIA 
detainees, who were held in austere conditions and in solitary confinement, also posed 




662 See DIRECTOR 
Abd al-Karim 

663 



38262 (150541Z MAY 03); 

38161 (131326Z MAY 03) 

38161 ( 131326Z MAY 03) 

MAY 03) for Abu Hazim; and DIRECTOR | 



664 




1 38161 (131326Z MAY 03) 

MAY 03) for 
39656 (060955Z JUN 03) 




39582 (041743Z JUN 03); | 

38365 (170652Z MAY 03) 

665 Asadallah was also placed in a “small isolation box” for 30 minutes, withou t auth orization and withou t discussion 
of how the technique would affect his ankle 

34294 

While CIA records contain information on other detainee medical complaints (see Volume III), those records also 
suggest that detainee medical complaints could be underreported in CIA medical records. For example, CIA 
medical records consistently report that CIA detainee Ramzi bin al-Shibh had no medical complaints. However, 

CIA interrogation records indicate that when bin al-Shibh had previously complained of ailments to CIA personnel, 
he was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and told by CIA interrogators that his medical 



condition was not of concern to the CIA. {See 



10591 (252002Z FEB 03); 



10627 (281949Z 



FEB 03).) In testimony on April 12, 2007, CIA Director Michael Hayden referenced medical care of detainees in 
the context of the ICRC report on CIA detentions. Hayden testified to the Committee: “The medical section of the 
ICRC report concludes that the association of CIA medical officers with the interrogation program is ‘contrary to 
international standards of medical ethics.’ That is just wrong. The role of CIA medical officers in the detainee 
program is and always has been and always will be to ensure the safety and the well-being of the detainee. The 
placement of medical officers during the interrogation techniques represents an extra measure of caution. Our 
medical officers do not recommend the employment or continuation of any procedures or techniques. The allegation 
in the report that a CIA medical officer threatened a detainee, stating that medical care was conditional on 
cooperation is blatantly false. Health care has always been administered based upon detainee needs. It’s neither 
policy nor practice to link medical care to any other aspect of the detainee program.” This testimony was 
incongruent with CIA records. 

TOP SECRE TE— 

Page 113 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N Q F O RN 



management challenges for the CIA. 666 For example, later in his detention, Ramzi bin al-Shibh 
exhibited behavioral and psychological problems, including visions, paranoia, insomnia, and 
attempts at self-harm. 667 CIA psychologists linked bin al-Shibh’s deteriorating mental state to 
his isolation and inability to cope with his long-term detention. 668 Similarly, ‘Abd al-Rahim al- 
Nashiri ’s unpredictable and disruptive behavior in detention made him one of the most difficult 
detainees for the CIA to manage. Al-Nashiri engaged in repeated belligerent acts, including 
throwing his food tray, 669 attempting to assault detention site personnel, 670 and trying to damage 
items in his cell. 671 Over a period of years, al-Nashiri accused the CIA staff of drugging or 
poisoning his food and complained of bodily pain and insomnia. 672 As noted, at one point, al- 
Nashiri launched a short-lived hunger strike, and the CIA responded by force feeding him 
rectally. 673 An October 2004 psychological assessment of al-Nashiri was used by the CIA to 
advance its discussions with National Security Council officials on establishing an “endgame” 
for the program. 674 In July 2005, CIA Headquarters expressed concern regarding al-Nashiri’ s 
“continued state of depression and uncooperative attitude.” 675 Days later a CIA psychologist 
assessed that al-Nashiri was on the “verge of a breakdown.” 676 



Beginning in March 2004, and continuing until his rendition to 
U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay in September 2006, Majid Khan engaged in a series of 
hunger strikes and attempts at self-mutilation that required significant attention from CIA 
detention site personnel. In response to Majid Khan’s hunger strikes, medical personnel 




666 For additiona l details, see Volume III. 

667 ■■■■ 175 9 (021319Z O CT 04); HEADQUARTERS 
(171225Z NOV 04); 

2207 (11131 9Z APR 



^■(040023Z NOV 05); 

1878 (140915Z NOV 04); ■|^Mh930 (061620Z DEC 04); 

(14150 7Z APR 05k|^Bl 2535 (05180 5Z JUL 05); 

1 2589 (120857Z JUL 05); 2830 (291304Z AUG 05); 1890 (171225Z NOV 

^^^9^20083 1Z NOV 04); CIA document entitled, “Detainee Talking Poi nts for ICRC Rebuttal, 12 
April 2007”; i|^HH^210(141507Z APR 05); ■^■■2535 (05 1 805Z JUL 05); ■■■■ 2210 
(141507Z APR^5k^MHB2535 (051805Z JUL()5)r^MBH 2830 (291304Z AUG 05); | 

1 9 30 (061620Z DEC 04)T^^^^B 22 10 (141507Z APR 05) 





2210 (141507Z APR 05); 



1691 (081609Z SEP 04); 

05); 2023 (151735Z JAN 05); 

(2 82019Z NO V 03) 

1029 (29 1750Z JUN 06); 
1716 (180742Z SEP 04); 





671 See, for example, |H 
1716 (180742Z SEP 04). 

672 See, for example, 

1959 (111700Z DEC 04); 



2535 (051 805Z JUL 05); 

1716(180742Z SEP 04); 
2515 (301946Z JUN 05); 



1142 (041358Z AUG 06); 
~ 1 3051 (301235Z SEP 05); 




1 2830 (291304Z AUG 

1998 (020752 Z JAN 
1150 

1543 (111600Z AUG 04); 
1029 (291750Z JUN 06) 




2474 (251622Z JUN 05); 



2673 (021451Z AUG 05); 





1356 (01 1644Z JUL 04); H^^HlSSO (140917Z NOV 04); 

I H ll IN i HI l Mil 1959 (1 1 1700Z DEC 04); 

2038 (211558ZJAN05k^^MpiHIHi 1091 (031835Z NOV 03); f 
1266(052309Z JAN 04); ^■■■■|^HT63^(271440Z MAR 04). 

HNMfll203 (23 1709ZMAY04)7^^H^Hi 1202 (231644Z MAY 04). CIA records indicate that at 
least five detainees were subjected to rectal rehydration or rectal feeding: Abu Zubaydah, Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, 
Khalid Shaykh Mohammad^Majid^ and Marwan al-Jabbur. See Volume HI for add itional details. 

674 Email from: ■■■■■■; to: [DETENTION SITE BLACK|j^| cc: 

subject: Interrogator Assessments/Request for Endgame Views; date: October 30, 2004. 

675 HEADQUARTERS ^^H(282217Z JUL 05) 

676 CIA Sametime exchange, dated 29/JUL/05 08:01:51 - 08:50:13; between and I 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 1 14 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



implemented various techniques to provide fluids and nutrients, including the use of a 
nasogastric tube and the provision of intravenous fluids. CIA records indicate that Majid Khan 
cooperated with the feedings and was permitted to infuse the fluids and nutrients himself. 677 
After approximately three weeks, the CIA developed a more aggressive treatment regimen 
“without unnecessary conversation.” 678 Majid Khan was then subjected to involuntary rectal 
feeding and rectal hydration, which included two bottles of Ensure. Later that same day, Majid 
Khan’s “lunch tray,” consisting of hummus, pasta with sauce, nuts, and raisins, was “pureed” 
and rectally infused. 679 Additional sessions of rectal feeding and hydration followed. 680 In 
addition to his hunger strikes, Majid Khan engaged in acts of self-harm that included attempting 
to cut his wrist on two occasions, 681 an attempt to chew into his arm at the inner elbow, 682 an 
attempt to cut a vein in the top of his foot, 683 and an attempt to cut into his skin at the elbow joint 
using a filed toothbrush. 684 



J. The CIA Seeks Reaffirmation of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program in 2003 

1. Administration Statements About the Humane Treatment of Detainees Raise Concerns at 
the CIA About Possible Lack of Policy Support for CIA Interrogation Activities 

On several occasions in early 2003, CIA General Counsel Scott 
Muller expressed concern to the National Security Council principals, White House staff, and 
Department of Justice personnel that the CIA’s program might be inconsistent with public 
statements from the Administration that the U.S. Government’s treatment of detainees was 
“humane.” 685 CIA General Counsel Muller therefore sought to verify with White House and 
Department of Justice personnel that a February 7, 2002, Presidential Memorandum requiring the 
U.S. military to treat detainees humanely did not apply to the CIA. 686 Following those 





3184 (161628Z SEP 04); 
3196 (201731Z SEP 04); 
3206 (21 1819Z SEP 04); 
3181 (161 62 1 Z SEP 04) 



3183 (161626Z SEP 04hj 
3190 (181558Z SEP 04); 

3197 (201731Z SEP 04); 

1135 (120625Z SEP 04); 

3237 (230552Z SEP 04) 

3240 (231839Z SEP 04) 

3259 (261734Z SEP 04). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “rectal 
rehydration” is a “well acknowledged medical technique to address pressing health issues.” A follow-up CIA 
document provided on October 25, 2013 (DTS #2013-3152), states that “[fjrom a health perspective, Majid Khan 
became uncooperative on 31 August 2004, when he initiated a hunger strike and before he underwent rectal 
rehydration. . . CIA assesses that the use of rectal rehydration is a medically sound hydration technique. ...” The 
assertion that Majid Khan was “uncooperative” prior to rectal rehydration and rectal feeding is inaccurate. As 
described in CIA records, prior to being subjected to rectal rehydration and rectal feeding, Majid Khan cooperated 
with the nasogastric feedings and was permitted to infuse the fluids and nutrients himself. 




[4242 (191550Z MAR 05); 



3694 (301800Z NOV 04); | 

[4250 (221213Z MAR 05) 

_ 3724 (031723Z DEC 04) 

3835 (260659Z DEC 04) 

[4614 (071358Z JUN 05) 

February 12, 2003, MFR from Scott Muller, Subject: “Humane” treatment of CIA detainees; March 7, 2003, 
Memorandum for DDCIA from Muller, Subject: Proposed Response to Human Rights Watch Letter. 

686 January 9, 2003, Draft Memorandum for Scott Mueller [sic], General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency, 
from John C. Yoo, Deputy Assistant Attor ney General, Office of Legal Counsel , re: Application of the President’s 

T OP SECRET/ / 

Page 115 of 499 



//NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



flNOF Q RN 



discussions in early 2003, the White House press secretary was advised to avoid using the term 
“humane treatment” when discussing the detention of al-Qa’ida and Taliban personnel. 687 



In mid-2003, CIA officials also engaged in discussions with the 
Department of Justice, the Department of Defense, and attorneys in the White House on whether 
representations could be made that the U.S. Government complied with certain requirements 
arising out of the Convention Against Torture, namely that the treatment of detainees was 
consistent with constitutional standards in the Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments. 688 In 
late June 2003, after numerous inter-agency discussions, William Haynes, the general counsel of 
the Department of Defense, responded to a letter from Senator Patrick Leahy stating that it was 
U.S. poli cy to compl y with these standar ds. 689 According to a memorandum from the CIA’s 
CTC Legal, 



|, the August 1, 2002, OLC opinion provided a legal 
“safe harbor” for the CIA’s use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. 690 The August 1, 2002, 
opinion did not, however, address the constitutional standards described in the letter from 
William Haynes. 



In July 2003, after the White House made a number of statements 
again suggesting that U.S. treatment of detainees was “humane,” the CIA asked the national 
security advisor for policy reaffirmation of the CIA’s use of its enhanced interrogation 
techniques. During the time that request was being considered, CIA Headquarters stopped 
approving requests from CIA officers to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 691 
Because of this stand-down, CIA interrogators, with CIA Headquarters approval, instead used 
repeated applications of the CIA’s “standard” interrogation techniques. These “standard” 
techniques were coercive, but not considered to be as coercive as the CIA’s “enhanced” 
interrogation techniques. At this time, sleep deprivation beyond 72 hours was considered an 



February 7, 2002, Memorandum on the Geneva Convention (III) of 1949 to the Release of an al Qaeda Detainee to 
the Custody of the CIA. The memorandum stated that neither al-Qa’ida nor Taliban detainees qualified as prisoners 
of war under Geneva, and that Common Article 3 of Geneva, requiring humane treatment of individuals in a 
conflict, did not apply to al-Qa’ida or Taliban detainees 



687 March 18, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from 
Legal Adviser. 

688 See, for example, March 18, 2003, email from: | 



the Record - Telcon with OLC; date: March 13, 2003; email from: Scott W. Muller; to: Stanley M. Moskowitz, John 



|, Subject: meeting with DOJ and NSC 
|; to: Scott Muller; subject: Memorandum for 



H. Moseman; cc: 

1:18:35 PM; email from: 




I, John A. Rizzo, 



|; subject: Interrogations; date: April 1, 2003, at 



; to: Scott Muller; cc: John Rizzo, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED]; subject: Black letter law on Interrogations; Legal Principles Applicable to CIA Detention and 
Interrogation of Captured Al-Qa’ida Personnel; date: April 17, 2003. 

689 June 25, 2003, Letter from William J. Haynes, II, General Counsel of the Department of Defense to Patrick 
Leahy, United States Senate. 



690 June 30, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from 
Enhanced Techniques (DTS #2009-2659). 



Subject: White House Meeting on 



691 



See, for example, email from: 



|; to: [REDACTED] and [REDACTED]; subject: FYI - Draft 
Paragraphs for the DCI on the Legal Issues on Interrogation, as requested by the General Counsel; date: March 14, 
2003; June 26, 2003, Statement by the President, United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, 
http://www.whiteho use.gov/news/releases/2003/06/2003Q626-3.htm; email from: John Rizzo; to: John Moseman, 

]; cc: Buzzy Krongard, Scott Muller, William Harlow; subject: Today’s Washington Post Piece on 
Administration Detainee Policy; date: June 27, 2003; July 3, 2003, Memorandum for National Security Advisor 
from Director of Central Intelligence George J. Tenet, Subject: Reaffirmation of the Central Intelligence Agency’s 
Interrogation Program. 

mi ii in i — 

Page 1 16 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



“enhanced” interrogation technique, while sleep deprivation under 72 hours was defined as a 
“standard” CIA interrogation technique. To avoid using an “enhanced” interrogation technique, 
CIA officers subjected Khallad bin Attash to 70 hours of standing sleep deprivation, two hours 
less than the maximum. After allowing him four hours of sleep, bin Attash was subjected to an 
additional 23 hours of standing sleep deprivation, followed immediately by 20 hours of seated 
sleep deprivation. 692 

Unlike during most of the CIA's interrogation program, during the 
time that CIA Headquarters was seeking policy reaffirmation, the CIA responded to infractions 
in the inte rrogation prog ram as reported through CIA cables and other communications. 

Although (HI' the chief of the interrogations program in RDG, does not appear to have 
been investigated or reprimanded for training interrogators on the abdominal slap before its use 
was approved, 693 training significant numbers of new interrogators to conduct interrogations on 
potentially compliant detainees, 694 or conducting large numbers of water dousing on detainees 
without requesting or obtaining authorization; 695 the CIA removed his certification to conduct 
interrogations in late July 2003 for placing a broom handle behind the knees of a detainee while 
that detainee was in a stress posi tion. 696 CIA Headquartersalsodecertified two other 
interrogators, [CIA OFFICER 1] and HIHHH’ in the same period, 

although there are no official records of why those decertifications occurred. 697 

2. The CIA Provides Inaccurate Information to Select Members of the National Security 
Council, Represents that “Termination of This Program Will Result in Loss of Life, 
Possibly Extensive Policymakers Reauthorize Program 



July 29, 2003, DCI Tenet and CIA General Counsel Muller 
attended a meeting with Vice President Cheney, National Security Advisor Rice, Attorney 
General Ashcroft, and White House Counsel Gonzales, among others, seeking policy 



692 Bin Attash has one leg, which swelled during standing sleep deprivation, resulting in the tra nsition to s eated sleep 
deprivation. He was also subjected to nudity and dietary manipulation during this period 



(212121ZJUL 03); 



HI 12385 (222045Z JUL 03); and 

693 HVT Training and Curriculum, November 2, 2002, at 17. 

694 HVT Training and Curriculum, November 2, 2002, at 17. 



12371 



12389 (232040Z JUL 03). 



695 



See, for example, | 



10168 (092130Z JAN 03); Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of 



Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, | 



|, April 7, 2003; CIA Office of Inspector General, 



Special Review: Countertenor ism Detention and Interrogation Activities (September 2001 - October 2003) (2003- 



7123-IG), Ma 






10168 (0921 3 0Z JAN03J; 

3 4179 (262200Z FEB 03); 

34310 

35025 (161321Z MAR 03). 

for Blue Ribbon Panel: CIA Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Programs at 22; 



34098 
34294 | 

34757 (101742Z MAR 03); and 



CTC Legal from Chief, CTC/RDG, July 28, 2003, 



Document not signed by 



696 April 7, 2005, Brief! n 

Memorandum for Chief, via | 

Subject: Decertification of former Interrogator 
available for signature.” 

697 See Memorandum for Chief, via 

28, 2003, Subject: Decertification of former Interrogator, signed by 

29, 2003; and April 7, 2005, B riefing for Blue Ribbon Panel: CI A Rend ition, Detention, and Interrogation Programs 
at 22; Memorandum for Chief, EH 
2003, Subject: Decertification of former In tenogi 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 117 of 499 





because he was “not 

| CTC Legal fr om Chief, CTC/RDG, July 
[CIA OFFICER 1] on July 



CTC Legal from Chief, CTC/RDG, July 28, 



7NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE G RET// 



//NOFORN 



reaffirmation of its coercive interrogation program. The presentation included a list of the CIA’s 
standard and enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA General Counsel Muller also provided a 
description of the waterboard interrogation technique, including the inaccurate representation 
that it had been used against KSM 119 times and Abu Zubaydah 42 times. 698 The presentation 
warned National Security Council principals in attendance that “termination of this program will 
result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” The CLA officers further noted that 50 percent of CIA 
intelligence reports on al-Qaida were derived from detainee reporting, and that “major threats 
were countered and attacks averted” because of the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. The CIA provided specific examples of “attacks averted” as a result of using the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including references to the U.S. Consulate in Karachi, 
the Heathrow Plot, the Second Wave Plot, and Iyman Faris. 699 As described later in this 
summary, and in greater detail in Volume II, these claims were inaccurate. After the CIA’s 
presentation, Vice President Cheney stated, and National Security Advisor Rice agreed, that the 
CIA was executing Administration policy in carrying out its interrogation program. 700 



The National Security Council principals at the July 2003 briefing 
initially concluded it was “not necessary or advisable to have a full Principals Committee 
meeting to review and reaffirm the Program.” 701 A CIA email noted that the official reason for 
not having a full briefing was to avoid press disclosures, but added that: 



“it is clear to us from some of the runup meetings we had with [White House] 
Counsel that the [White House] is extremely concerned [Secretary of State] 



698 CIA records indicate that KSM received at least 183 applications of the waterboard technique, and that Abu 
Zubaydah received at least 83 applications of the waterboard technique. In April 2003, CIA Inspector General John 
Helgerson asked General Counsel Scott Muller about the repetitious use of the waterboard. In early June 2003, 
White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales and the Vice President’s Counsel, David Addington, who were aware of the 
inspector general’s concerns, asked Muller whether the number of waterboard repetitions had been too high in light 
of the OLC guidance. This question prompted Muller to seek information on the use of the waterboard on Abu 
Zubaydah and KSM. ( See interview of Scott Muller, by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED] and 
[REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 20, 2003; and email from: Scott Muller; to: John Rizzo; cc: 



[REDACTED], 



|, [REDACTED]; subject: “Report from 



Gitmo trip (Not proofread, as usual)”; date: June |, 2003, 05:47 PM.) As Muller told the OIG, he could not keep up 
with cable traffic from CIA detainee interrogations and instead received monthly briefings. According to OIG 
records of the interview, Muller “said he does not know specifically how [CIA guidelines on interrogations] changed 
because he does not get that far down into the weeds,” and “each detainee is different and those in the field have 
some latitude.” ( See interview of Scott Muller, Office of the Inspector General, August 20, 2003.) Despite this 
record and others detailed in the full Committee Study, the CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts that the CIA’s 
“confinement conditions and treatment of high profile detainees like Abu Zubaydah were closely scrutinized at all 
levels of management from the outset.” 

699 August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 
July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation Program, July 29, 2003. 

700 August 5, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Scott Muller, Subject: Review of the Interrogation Program 
on 29 July 2003. A briefing slide describing the “Pros” and “Cons” associated with the program listed the following 
under the heading “Con”: (1) “Blowback due to public perception of ‘humane treatment,”’ (2) “ICRC continues to 
attack USG policy on detainees,” and (3) “Congressional inquiries continue.” See Volume II for additional details. 

701 August 5, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program, July 
29, 2003. 

1 1 ii 1 1 iii i 

Page 118 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP S EGRET// 



//NOFQRN 



Powell would blow his stack if he were to be briefed on what’s been going 



on. 



”702 



National Security Advisor Rice, however, subsequently decided 
that Secretary of State Colin Powell and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld should be 
briefed on the CIA interrogation program prior to recertification of the covert action. 703 As 
described, both were then formally briefed on the CIA program for the first time in a 25 minute 
briefing on September 16, 2003. 704 

On September 4, 2003, CIA records indicate that CIA officials may 
have provided Chairman Roberts, Vice Chairman Rockefeller, and their staff directors a briefing 
regarding the Administration’s reaffirmation of the program. 705 Neither the CIA nor the 
Committee has a contemporaneous report on the content of the briefing or any confirmation that 
the briefing occurred. 



K. Additional Oversight and Outside Pressure in 2004: ICRC, Inspector General, Congress, 
and the U.S. Supreme Court 

/. ICRC Pressure Leads to Detainee Transfers; Department of Defense Official Informs the 
CIA that the U.S. Government “ Should Not Be in the Position of Causing People to 
Disappear the CIA Provides Inaccurate Information on CIA Detainee to the 
Department of Defense 



) In January 2004, the ICRC sent a letter to 

indicating that it was aware that the United States Government was holding 

unacknowledged detainees in several facilities in Country | “incommunicado for extensive 
periods of time, subjected to unacceptable conditions of internment, to ill treatment and torture, 
while deprived of any possible recourse.” 706 According to the CIA, the letter included a “fairly 
complete list” of CIA detainees to whom the ICRC had not had access. 707 This prompted CIA 
Headquarters to conclude that it was necessary to reduce the number of detainees in CIA 
custody. 708 The CIA subsequently transferred at least 25 of its detainees in Country | to the 
U.S. military and foreign governments. The CIA also released five detainees. 709 



702 Email from: John Rizzo; to: subject: Rump PC on interrogations; date: July 31, 2003. 

703 August 5, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program, July 
29, 2003. 

704 September 26, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program. 

705 September 4, 2003, CIA Me morandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing 

706 January 6, 2004, Letter from | ””” 




709 See, for example, DIREC TOR^^M^^^^^^M; DIRECTOR] 

1 696 Hm^^^piDIRECTOR 
|; HEADQUARTER S 

2308 

1001 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 119 of 499 



; DIR ECTOR 
; HEADQUARTERS 

2335 

7NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



The CIA provided a factually incorrect description to the 
Department of Defense concerning one of the 18 CIA detainees transferred to U.S. military 
custody in March 2004. The transfer letter described CIA detainee Ali Jan as “the most trusted 
bodyguanU)f Jaluluddin Haqqani (a top AQ target of the USG)” who was captured in the village 
of or^un^B, 2002. 710 Although there was an individual named Ali Jan captured in 

the village of on J une fl* 2002 i ^^CI^records indicate that he was not the detainee 

being held by the CIA in the Country facility. The Ali Jan in CIA custod y was 

apprehended circa early August 2003, during the U.S. military operation in 

Zormat Valley, Paktia Province, Afghanistan. 712 CIA records indicate that Ali Jan was 
transferred to CIA custody after his satellite phone rang while he was in military custody, and the 
translator indicated the caller was speaking in Arabic. 713 After his transfer to U.S. military 
custody, Ali Jan was eventually released on July |, 2004. 714 

In response to the ICRC’s formal complaint about detainees being 
kept in Country | without ICRC access, State Department officials met with senior ICRC 
officials in Geneva, and indicated that it was U.S. policy to encourage all countries to provide 
ICRC access to detainees, including Country |. 715 While the State Department made these 
official representations to the ICRC, the CIA was repeatedly directing the same country to deny 
the ICRC access to the CIA detainees. In June 2004, the secretary of state ordered the U.S. 
ambassador in that countr^^dive^^emarche, “in essence demanding [the country] provide 
full access to all [country detainees,” which included detainees being held at 

the CIA’s behest. 716 These conflicting messages from the United States Government, as well as 
increased ICRC pressure on the country for failing to provide access, created significant tension 
between the United States and the country in question. 717 

Later that year, in advance of a National Security Council 
Principals Committee meeting on September 14, 2004, officials from the Department of Defense 
called the CIA to inform the CIA that Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz would not 
support the CIA’s position that notifying the ICRC of all detainees in U.S. Government custody 
would harm U.S. national security. According to an internal CIA email following the call, the 
deputy secretary of defense had listened to the CIA’s arguments for nondisclosure, but believed 
that it was time for full notification. The email stated that the Department of Defense supported 
the U.S. Government’s position that there should be full disclosure to the ICRC, unless there 
were compelling reasons of military necessity or national security. The email added that the 



710 March 4, 2004, Letter from Jose Rodriguez, Director, DCI Counterterrorist Center to Thomas O’Connell, 
Assist ant Secre tary of Defense, Special Op erations/Low Intensity Conflict. 

04) 

04) 




2296 (101709Z 
2296 (101709Z 



Details in June 13, 2005, Letter to ICRC, responding to 2004 ICRC note verbale. 




2348 



714 



7,6 HEADQUARTERS 
CIA custody were issuing demar ches. 
issued a demarche to the U.S. in 
92037, and 93291 

717 For more information, see Volume I. 

TOP SECRET// 



2004. Seel 



During this same period, countries whos e nationals were in 
issued a demarche to Co untry 
2274' 




# NOFORN 



Page 120 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SEGRET// 



//NOFORN 



Department of Defense did not believe an adequate articulation of military necessity or national 
security reasons warranting nondisclosure existed, that “DoD is tired of ‘taking hits’ for CIA 
‘ghost detainees,’” and that the U.S. government “should not be in the position of causing people 
to ‘disappear.’” 718 

Despite numerous meetings and communications within the 
executive branch throughout 2004, the United States did not formally respond to the January 6, 
2004, ICRC letter until June 13, 2005. 719 

2. CIA Leadership Calls Draft Inspector General Special Review of the Program 

u Imbalanced and Inaccurate , ” Responds with Inaccurate Information; CIA Seeks to 
Limit Further Review of the CIA ’s Detention and Interrogation Program by the Inspector 
General 



The CIA’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG) was first 
informed of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program in November 2002, nine months 
after Abu Zubaydah became the CIA’s first detainee. As described, the information was 
conveyed by the DDO, who also informed the OIG of the death of Gul Rahman. In January 
2003, the DDO further requested that the OIG investigate allegations of unauthorized 
interrogation techniques against ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri. Separately, the OIG “received 
information that some employees were concerned that certain covert Agency activities at an 
overseas detention and interrogation site might involve violations of human rights,” according to 
the OIG’s Special Review. 720 



During the course of the OIG’s interviews, numerous CIA officers 
expressed concerns about the CIA’s lack of preparedness for the detention and interrogation of 
Abu Zubaydah. 721 Other CIA officers expressed concern about the analytical assumptions 
driving interrogations, 722 as well as the lack of language and cultural background among 



718 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: John Rizzo, [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED],! 



[REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|, Jose Rodriguez, John P. Mudd, [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: DoD’s position on ICRC notification; date: September 13, 2004. 

719 June 13, 2005, Letter to ICRC, responding to 2004 ICRC note verbale. 

720 Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities (September 2001 - October 2003) 
(2003-7 123-IG), 7 May 2004, (DTS #2004-2710). 

721 The chief of Station in the country that hosted the CIA’s first detention site told the OIG that “[t]he Reports 
Officers did not know what was required of them, analysts were not knowledgeable of the target, translators were 
not native Arab speakers, and at least one of the [chiefs of Base] had limited fielc^xperience/\See Interview report 
of [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, May 20, 2003. According to IfllHHH of CTC Legal, 
there was no scre ening procedure in place for officers assigned to DETENTION SITE GREEN. See interview of 

b^REDACTEDDmd [REDACTED, Office of the Inspector General, February 14, 2003. See 
also interview of ■HHHHHH, Office of the Inspector General, March 24, 2003. 

722 In addition to the statements to the OIG described above, regarding the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, CIA 



officers expressed more general concerns. 



| noted, the assumptions at CIA Headquarters that 



Abu Zubaydah “knew everything about Al-Qa’ida, including details of the next attack” reflected how “the ‘Analyst 




Office of the 
, subject matter experts 



vs. Interrogator’ issue ha[d] been around from ‘day one.’” (See interview of | 

Inspector General, February 27, 2003.) According to Chief of Interrogations | 
often provided interrogation requiremen ts that were “n ot valid or well thought out,” providing the example of 
Mustafa al-Hawsawi. (See interview of |^^^^^^^|^ffic^nh^nspecto^ieneral, April 7, 2003.) Senior CIA 

mi 1 1 iii i 

Page 121 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ ZNOFORN 



members of the interrogation teams. 723 Some CIA officers described pressure from CIA 
Headquarters to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, which they attrib uted to fa ulty 
analytica^ssumptions about what detainees should know. 724 As the chief of RDG, HU 
mmm, stated to the OIG in a February 2003 interview: 

“CTC does not know a lot about al-Qa’ida and as a result, Headquarters 
analyst^ave constructed ‘models’ of what al-Qa’ida represents to them. 

n °ted that the Agency does not have the linguists or subject 
matter experts it needs. The questions sent from CTC/Usama bin Laden 
(UBL) to the interrogators are based on SIGINT [signals intelligence] and 
other intelligence that often times is incomplete or wrong. When the detainee 
does not respond to the question, the assumption at Headquarters is that the 
detainee is holding back and ‘knows’ more, and consequently, Headquarters 
recommends resumption of EITs. This difference of opinion between the 
interrogators and Headquarters as to whether the detainee is ‘co mpliant’ is th e 
type of ongoing pressure the interrogation team is exposed to. 
believes the waterboard was used ‘recklessly’ - ‘too many times’ on Abu 
Zubaydah at [DETENTION SITE GREEN], based in part on faulty 
intelligence.” 725 



interrogator | 



I told the OIG that interrogators “suffered from a lack of substantive requirements from 



CIA Headquarters,” and that “in every case so far, Headquarters’ model of what the detainee should know is 



flawed.” told the OIG that “I do not want to beat a man up based on what Headquarters says he should 

know,” commenting that, “I want my best shot on something he (the detainee) knows, not a fishing expedition on 



things he should know.” ( See interview of 



|, Office of the Inspector General, April 30, 2003.) Two 
interviewees told the OIG thatrequirements were sometimes based on inaccurate or improperly translated intercepts. 



See interview of interrogator | 



|, Office of the Inspector General, March 24, 2003; Interview of 

[former chief of Station in the country that hosted the CIA’s first detention site], Office of the 
Inspector General, May 29, 2003. 

723 One interviewee noted that several interrogators with whom he had worked insiste d on conducting inte rrogations 
in English to demonstrate their dominance over the detainee. ( See interview report of Office of 

the Inspector General, March 17, 2003.) The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that “[t]he program 
continued to face challenges in identifying sufficient, qualified staff — particularly language-qualified personnel - as 
requirements im posed by Agency involvement in Iraq increased.” 

of CTC Legal, “[t]he seventh floor [CIA leadership] can complicate the process 



724 



According to 



because of the mi ndset that interrog ations are the silver bullet [and CIA leadership is] expecting immediate results.” 
(See interview of 



m HH’ Office of the Inspector General, February 14, 2003.) Senior Interrogator 
| provided the example of Khallad bin Attash, who, he told the OIG, was determined by the chief of Base at 
DETENTIOh^IT^BLUE not to “warrant” the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. According to 



debriefer 



| called ALEC Station and told them to “go to the mat” in advocating for the use of the CIA’s 



enhanced interrogation techniques, claiming that bin Attash was holding back information. (See interview of 



|, Office of the Inspector General, April 30, 2003.) 



described the “inherent tension 



that occasionally exists between officers at the interrogation facilities and those at Headquarters who view the 



detainees are withholding information.” 



[ provided the example of Abu Yassir al-Jaza’iri. (See interview 



|, Office of the Inspector General, May 8, 2003.) 



also described disagreements on 



whether to subjectdetaineesto the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques as a “field versus Headquarters issue.” 



(See interview of 



|, Office of the Inspector General, August 18, 2003.) As described, interviewees also 



described pressur^ron^IAHeadquarters related to the interrogations of KSM and Abu Zubaydah. 



725 Interview of Offic^Hh^InspectorGenera^ 21, 2003. 

Page 122 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

























UNCLASSIFIED 




One senior interrogator, informed the OIG that 

differences between CIA Headquarters a nd the int errogators at the CIA detention sites were not 
part of the official record. According to “all of the fighting and criticism is done over 

the phone and is not put into cables,” and that CIA “[c]ables reflect things that are ‘all rosy.’” 726 

As is described elsewhere, and reflected in the final OIG Special 
Review, CIA officers discussed numerous other topics with the OIG, including conditions at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT, specific interrogations, the video taping of interrogations, the 
administration of the program, and concerns about the lack of an “end game” for CIA detainees, 
as well as the impact of possible public revelations concerning the existence and operation of the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 727 

In January 2004, the CIA inspector general circulated for comment 
to various offices within the CIA a draft of the OIG Special Review of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. Among other matters, the OIG Special Review described divergences 
between the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques as applied and as described to the 
Department of Justice in 2002, the use of unauthorized techniques, and oversight problems 
related to DETENTION SITE COBALT. The draft OIG Special Review elicited responses from 
the CIA’s deputy director for operations, the deputy director for science and technology, the 
Office of General Counsel, and the Office of Medical Services. Several of the responses — 
particularly those from CIA General Counsel Scott Muller and CIA Deputy Director for 
Operations James Pavitt — were highly critical of the inspector general’s draft Special Review. 
General Counsel Muller wrote that the OIG Special Review presented “an imbalanced and 
inaccurate picture of the Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program,” and claimed 
the OIG Special Review, “[o]n occasion,” “quoted or summarized selectively and misleadingly” 
from CIA documents. 728 Deputy Director for Operations James Pavitt wrote that the OIG 
Special Review should have come to the “conclusion that our efforts have thwarted attacks and 
saved lives,” and that “EITs (including the water board) have been indispensable to our 
successes.” Pavitt attached to his response a document describing information the CIA obtained 
“as a result of the lawful use of EITs” that stated, “[t]he evidence points clearly to the fact that 
without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist 



726 Interview of Office of the Inspector General, April 30, 2003. 

727 DDO Pavitt described possible public revelations related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program as 
“the CIA’s worst nightmare.” Interview of James Pavitt, Office of the Inspector General, September 21, 2003. 
According to OIG records of an interview with DCI Tenet, “Tenet believes that if the general public were to find out 
about this program, many would believe we are torturers.” Tenet added, however, that his “only potential moral 
dilemma would be if more Americans die at the hands of terrorists and we had someone in our custody who 
possessed information that could have prevented deaths, but we had not obtained such information.” See interview 
of George Tenet, Office of the Inspector General, memorandum dated, September 8, 2003. 

728 See CIA Memorandum from Scott W. Muller, General Counsel, to Inspector General re Interrogation Program 

Special Review, dated February 24, 2004 (2003-7123-IG). 




Page 123 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



attacks involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” 729 A review of CIA records found 
that the representations in the Pavitt materials were almost entirely inaccurate. 730 

In addition to conveying inaccurate information on the operation, 
management, and effectiveness of the CIA program, CIA leadership continued to impede the 
OIG in its efforts to oversee the program. In July 2005, Director Goss sent a memorandum to the 
inspector general to “express several concerns regarding the in-depth, multi-faceted review” of 
the CIA’s CTC. The CIA director wrote that he was “increasingly concerned about the 
cumulative impact of the OIG’s work on CTC’s performance,” adding that “I believe it makes 
sense to complete existing reviews... before opening new ones.” Director Goss added, “[t]o my 
knowledge, Congress is satisfied that you are meeting its requirements” with regard to the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. 731 At the time, however, the vice chairman of the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence was seeking a Committee investigation of the CIA program, in 
part because of the aspects of the program that were not being investigated by the Office of 
Inspector General. 732 In April 2007, CIA Director Michael Hayden had his “Senior 
Councilor” — an individual within the CIA who was accountable only to the CIA director — 
conduct a review of the inspector general’s practices. Defending the decision to review the OIG, 
the CIA told the Committee that there were “morale issues that the [CIA] director needs to be 
mindful of,” and that the review had uncovered instances of “bias” among OIG personnel against 
the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 733 In 2008, the CIA director announced the 
results of his review of the OIG to the CIA work force and stated that the inspector general had 
“chosen to take a number of steps to heighten the efficiency, assure the quality, and increase the 
transparency of the investigative process.” 734 

3. The CIA Does Not Satisfy Inspector General Special Review Recommendation to Assess 
the Effectiveness of the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 



The final May 2004 OIG Special Review included a 
recommendation that the CIA’s DDO conduct a study of the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
interrogation techniques within 90 days. Prompted by the recommendation, the CIA tasked two 
senior CIA officers to lead “an informal operational assessment of the CIA detainee program.” 
The reviewers were tasked with responding to 12 specific terms of reference, including an 
assessment of “the effectiveness of each interrogation technique and environmental deprivation” 



729 Memorandum to the Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, dated February 
27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Program’ (2003-7123-IG),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Activities,” dated February 24, 2004. 

730 For additional information, see Volume II. 

731 July 21, 2005, Memorandum for Inspector General from Porter J. Goss, Director, Central Intelligence Agency re: 
New IG Work Impacting the CounterTerrorism Center. 

732 Transcript of business meeting, April 14, 2005 (DTS #2005-2810). 

733 Committee Memorandum for the Record, “Staff Briefing with Bob Deitz on his Inquiry into the Investigative 
Practices of the CIA Inspector General,” October 17, 2007 (DTS #2007-4166); Committee Memorandum for the 
Record, “Notes from Meetings with John Helgerson and Bob Deitz in late 2007 and early 2008” (DTS #2012-4203); 
Committee Memorandum for the Record, “Staff Briefing with CIA Inspector General John Helgerson” (DTS #2007- 
4165). 



734 Letter from DCIA Michael Hayden to Senator John D. Rockefeller IV, January 29, 2008 (DTS #2008-0606). 

TOP SECRE TAM^^^I^— ^ NQFQRN 



Page 124 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




to determine if any techniques or deprivation should be “added, modified, or discontinued.” 735 
According to a CIA memorandum from the reviewers, their review was based on briefings by 
CTC personnel, “a discussion with three senior CTC managers who played key roles in running 
the CIA detainee program,” and a review of nine documents, including the OIG Special Review 
and an article by the CIA contractors who developed the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, Hammond DUNBAR and Grayson SWIGERT. 736 As described in this summary, 
and in more detail in Volume n, these documents contained numerous inaccurate representations 
regarding the operation and effectiveness of the CIA program. There are no records to indicate 
the two senior CIA officers reviewed the underlying interrogation cables and intelligence records 
related to the representations. Their resulting assessment repeated information found in the 
documents provided to them and reported that the “CIA Detainee Program is a success, 
providing unique and valuable intelligence at the tactical level for the benefit of policymakers, 
war fighters, and the CIA’s covert action operators.” The assessment also reported that 
regulations and procedures for handling detainees were “adequate and clear,” and that the 
program had responded swiftly, fairly, and completely to deviations from the structured 
program. 737 Nonetheless, the assessment came to the conclusion that detention and 
interrogations activities should not be conducted by the CIA, but by “experienced U.S. law 
enforcement officers,” stating: 

“The Directorate of Operations (DO) should not be in the business of running 
prisons or ‘temporary detention facilities.’ The DO should focus on its core 
mission: clandestine intelligence operations. Accordingly, the DO should 
continue to hunt, capture, and render targets, and then exploit them for 
intelligence and ops leads once in custody. The management of their 
incarceration and interrogation should be conducted by appropriately 
experienced U.S. law enforcement officers, because that is their charter and 
they have the training and experience.” 738 

The assessment noted that the CIA program required significant 
resources at a time when the CIA was already stretched thin. Finally, the authors wrote that they 
“strongly believe” that the president and congressional oversight members should receive a 



735 May 12, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Chief, Information 

Operations Center, and Henry Crumpton, Chief, National Resources Division, via Associate Deputy Director for 
Operations, with the subject line, “Operational Review of CIA Detainee Program/^^^^^ 

736 May 12, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Chief, Information 

Operations Center, and Henry Crumpton, Chief, National Resources Division, via Associate Deputy Director for 
Operations, with the subject line, “Operational Review of CIA Detainee Program.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response 
states, “[w]e acknowledge that the Agency erred in permitting the contractors to assess the effectiveness of enhanced 
techniques. They should not have been considered for such a role given their financial interest in continued 
contracts from CIA.” 

737 May 12, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Chief, Information 

Operations Center, and Henry Crumpton, Chief, National Resources Division, via Associate Deputy Director for 
Operations re Operational Review of CIA Detainee Program. For additionaUnfomiation^ee Volume II. 

738 May 12, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Chief, Information 

Operations Center, and Henry Crumpton, Chief, National Resources Division, via Associate Deputy Director for 
Operations re Operational Review of CIA Detainee Program. 



Page 125 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



fl NOFORN 



comprehensive update on the program, “[g]iven the intense interest and controversy surrounding 
the detainee issue.” 739 

On January 26, 2005, DCI Goss forwarded the senior officer 
review to Inspector General John Helgerson. 740 The DCI asked whether the review would satisfy 
the inspector general recommendation for an independent review of the program. 741 On January 
28, 2005, the inspector general responded that the senior officer review would not satisfy the 
recommendation fo^rmndependent review. 742 The inspector general also responded to a 
concern raised by that studying the results of CIA interrogations would 

amount to human experimentation, stating: 

“I fear there was a misunderstanding. OIG did not have in mind doing 
additional, guinea pig research on human beings. What we are recommending 
is that the Agency undertake a careful review of its experience to date in using 
the various techniques and that it draw conclusions about their safety, 
effectiveness, etc., that can guide CIA officers as we move ahead. We make 
this recommendation because we have found that the Agency over the decades 
has continued to get itself in messes related to interrogation programs for one 
overriding reason: we do not document and learn from our experience - each 
generation of officers is left to improvise anew, with problematic results for 
our officers as individuals and for our Agency. We are not unaware that there 
are subtleties to this matter, as the effectiveness of techniques varies among 
individuals, over time, as administered, in combination with one another, and 
so on. All the more reason to document these important findings.” 743 

In November and December 2004, the CIA responded to National 
Security Advisor Rice’s questions about the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques by asserting that an effectiveness review was not possible, while highlighting 
examples of “[k]ey intelligence” the CIA represented was obtained after the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. The December 2004 memorandum prepared for the national 
security advisor entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” 
begins: 



I, Chief, Information 



739 May 12, 2004 Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from | 

Operations Center, and Henry Crumpton, Chief, National Resources Division, via Associate Deputy Director for 
Operations re Operational Review of CIA Detainee Program. 

740 See Volume I for additional information. 

cc: Jose Rodriguez, John Rizzo, [REDACTED], 
OI^Report^ate: January 28, 2005. 

■MMM; cc: Jose Rodriguez, John Rizzo, [REDACTED], 
TJIC^eport^anuary 28, 2005. 

IHH8HB cc; Jose Rodriguez, John Rizzo, [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED]; subject: DCI Question Regarding OIG Report; date: January 28, 2005. The CIA’s June 2013 
Response maintains that “[a] systematic study over time of the effectiveness of the techniques would have been 
encumbered by a number of factors,” including “Federal policy on the protection of human subjects and the 
impracticability of establishing an effectiv e control group.” 

TOP SECRET/^ ^BJMmjIfJJ^NOFORN 

Page 126 of 499 



741 Email from: John Helgerson; to: Porter Goss, 
[REDACTED]; subject: DCI Question Regardin 

742 Email from: John Helgerson; to: Porter Goss, 
[REDACTED]; subject: DCI Question Regardin 

743 Email from: John Helgerson; to: Porter Goss, 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



“Action Requested: None. This memorandum responds to your request for an 
independent study of the foreign intelligence efficacy of using enhanced 
interrogation techniques. There is no way to conduct such a study. What we 
can do, however, if [sic] set forth below the intelligence the Agency obtained 
from detainees who, before their interrogations, were not providing any 
information of intelligence [value].” 744 



Under a section of the memorandum entitled, “Results,” the CIA 
memo asserts that the “CIA’s use of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of 
a comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots [and] capture 
additional terrorists.” The memorandum then lists examples of “[k]ey intelligence collected 
from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation techniques,” which led to “disrupte[ed] 
terrorist plots” and the “capture [of] additional terrorists.” The examples include: the “Karachi 
Plot,” the “Heathrow Plot,” “the ‘Second Wave’” plotting, the identification of the “the Guraba 
Cell,” the identification of “Issa al-Hindi,” the arrest of Abu Talha al-Pakistani, “Hambali’s 
Capture,” information on Jaffar al-Tayyar, the “Dirty Bomb” plot, the arrest of Sajid Badat, and 
information on Shkai, Pakistan. CIA records do not indicate when, or if, this memorandum was 
provided to the national security advisor. 745 



A subsequent CIA memorandum, dated March 5, 2005, concerning 
an upcoming meeting between the CIA director and the national security advisor on the CIA’s 
progress in completing the OIG recommended review of the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques states, “we [CIA] believe this study is much needed and should be 
headed up by highly respected national-level political figures with widely recognized reputations 
for independence and fairness.” 746 



On March 21, 2005, the director of the CTC formally proposed the 
“establishment of an independent ‘blue ribbon’ commission... with a charter to stud^u^^^ 
ElTs.” 747 The CIA then began the processofestablishimM^^ 

and BMHMHNMMMHHMNRMHiBBHii 
BHHBHIHBHHHIIB!- Both panelists received briefings and paper s from CI A 
personnel who participated in the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. BH [^ e 
first panelist] wrote: “It is clear from our discussions with both DO and D1 officers that the 
program is deemed by them to be a great success, and I would concur. The EITs, as part of the 
overall program, are credited with enabling the US to disrupt terrorist plots, capture additional 
terrorists, and collect a high volume of useful intelligence on al-Qa’ida (AQ).... There are 
accounts of numerous plots against the US and the West that were revealed as a result of HVD 



744 December 2004 CIA Memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence,” 
Subject: “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 

745 December 2004 CIA Memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence,” 
Subject: “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” Italics in original. 

746 March 5, 2005, Talking Points for Weekly Meeting with National Security Advisor re CIA Proposal for 
Independent Study of the Effectiveness of CTC Interrogation Program’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques. 

747 March 21, 2005, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Robert L. Grenier, Director DCI 
Counterterrorism Center, re Proposal for Full-Scope Independent Study of the CTC Rendition, Detention, and 
Interrogation Programs. 

top - ^ecr e^^^^^—^^B^noeorn 

Page 127 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOPSECRET// 



/VNOFORN 



interrogations.” He also observed, however, that “[njeither my background nor field of expertise 
particularly lend themselves to judgim^h^ffectiveness of interrogation techniques, taken 
individually or collectively.” 748 [the second panelist] concluded that “there is no 

objective way to answer the question of efficacy,” but stated it was possible to “make some 
general observations” about the program based on CIA personnel assessments of “the quality of 
the intelligence provided” by CIA detainees. Regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, he wrote: “here enters the epistemological problem. We can never 
know whether or not this intelligence could have been extracted though alternative procedures. 
Spokesmen from within the organization firmly believe it could not have been.” 749 

4. The CIA Wrongfully Detains Khalid Al-Masri; CIA Director Rejects Accountability for 
Officer Involved 



After the dissemination of the draft CIA Inspector General Special 
Review in early 2004, approvals from CIA Headquarters to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques adhered more closely to the language of the DCI guidelines. Nonetheless, CIA 
records indicate that officers at CIA Headquarters continued to fail to properly monitor 
justifications for the capture and detention of detainees, as well as the justification for the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on particular detainees. 750 



For example, on January 2004, the CIA rendered German 
citizen Khalid al-Masri to a Country | facility used by the CIA for detention purposes. The 
rendition was based on the determination by officers in the CIA’s ALEC Station that “al-Masri 
knows key information that could assist in the capture of other al-Qa’ida operatives that pose a 
serious threat of violence or death to U.S. persons and interests and who may be planning 
terrorist activities.” 751 The cable did not state that Khalid al-Masri himself posed a serious threat 
of violence or death, the standard required for detention under the September 17, 2001, 
Memorandum of Notification (MON). 



CIA debriefing cables from Country | on January 27, 2004, and 
January 28, 2004, note that Khalid al-Masri “seemed bewildered on why he has been sent to this 
particular prison,” 752 and was “adamant that [CIA] has the wrong person.” 753 Despite doubts 
from CIA officers in Country | about Khalid al-Masri’ s links to terrorists, and RDG’s 
concurrence with those doubts, different components within the CIA disagreed on the process for 
his release. 754 As later described by the CIA inspector general, officers in ALEC Station 
continued to think that releasing Khalid al-Masri would pose a threat to U.S. interests and that 



748 September 2, 2005 Memorandum from to Director Porter Goss, CIA re Assessment of EITs 

Effectiveness. For additional information, see Volume I I. 

749 September 23, 2005 Memorandum from HHIHI to ^ Honorable Porter Goss, Director, Central Intelligence 
Agency re Response to Request from Director for Assessment of EIT Effectiveness. For additional information, see 
Volume II. 

750 For additional information, see Volume III. 

751 

752 

753 

754 

T OP SECRET// ^^^^^^^^^»/NOFORN 



mmmmammmmgKm l65g ^^^■jano4); alec jan 04) 

M ? <7 * , 1 543051 ^ 

B-l:-!:-! » »» "-— 54301 

■MHiR 1871 HEADQUARTERS (0223412 APR 04) 



Page 128 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFOR N 



monitoring should be required, while those in the CIA’s Division did not want to notify 

the German government about the rendition of a German citizen. 755 Because of the significance 
of the dispute, the National Security Council settled the matter, concluding that al-Masri should 
be repatriated and that the Germans should be told about al-Masri’ s rendition. 756 

On May K2004, Khalid al-Masri was transferred from Country | 
to ^^Ip 57 After al-Masri arrived in^^^H, CIA officers released him and sent him toward 
a fake bord er crossin g, where the officers told him he would be sent back to Germany because he 
had entered illegally. 758 At the time of his release, al-Masri was provided 14,500 

Euros, 759 as well as his belongings. 760 

On July 16, 2007, the CIA inspector general issued a Report of 
Investigation on the rendition and detention of Khalid al-Masri, concluding that “[available 
intelligence information did not provide a sufficient basis to render and detain Khalid al-Masri,” 
and that the “Agency’s prolonged detention of al-Masri was unjustified.” 761 On October 9, 2007, 
the CIA informed the Committee that it “lacked sufficient basis to render and detain al-Masri,” 
and that the judgment by operations officers that al-Masri was associated with terrorists who 
posed a threat to U.S. interests “was not supported by available intelligence/^^^CIA director 
nonetheless decided that no further action was warranted against then the 

deputy chief of ALEC Station, who advocated for al-Masri’s rendition, because “[t]he Director 
strongly believes that mistakes should be expected in a business filled with uncertainty and that, 
when they result from performance that meets reasonable standards, CIA leadership must stand 
behind the officers who make them.” The notification also stated that “with regard to 
counterterrorism operations in general and the al-Masri matter in particular, the Director believes 
the scale tips decisively in favor of accepting mistakes that over connect the dots against those 
that under connect them.” 762 



755 CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation, The Rendition and Detention of German Citizen Khalid 
al-Masri (2004-760 1-IG), July 16, 2007. 

756 CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation, The Rendition and Detention of German Citizen Khalid 
al-Masri (2004-7 60 1-IG), July 1 6, 2 007. 

2507 

142655 



760 



Using May 2004 exchange rates, this amounted to approximately $17,000. 
142655 



761 CIA Office of Inspector General, Report of Investigation, The Rendition and Detention of German Citizen Khalid 
al-Masri (2004-7601 -IG), July 16, 2007. 



762 



Referring to | 



and a second CTC officer named in the OIG’s Report of Investigation, the 
notification to Congress stated that the director “does not believe that... the performance of the two named CTC 
officers fall below a reasonable level of professionalism, skill, and diligence as defined in CIA’s Standard for 
Employee Accountability.” The notification also stated that there was a “high threat environment” at the time of the 
rendition, which “was essentially identical to the one in which CTC employees, including the two in question here, 
previously had been sharply criticized for not connecting the dots prior to 9/1 1.” The notification acknowledged “an 
insufficient legal justification, which failed to meet the standard prescribed in the [MON],” and referred to the acting 
general counsel the task of assessing legal advice and personal accountability. Based on recommendations from the 
inspector general, the CIA “developed a template for rendition proposals that makes clear what information is 
required, including the intelligence basis for that information.” (See Congressional notification, with the subject, 
“CIA Response to OIG Investigation Regarding the Rendition and Detention of German Citizen Khalid al-Masri,” 
dated October 9, 2007 (DTS #2007-4026).) The last CIA detainee, Muhammad Rahim, had already been rendered 
to CIA custody by the time of this notification^Th^CIA^un^Ol^Response points to a review of analytical 

TOP 

Page 129 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 




FEB 04); 



AN 04); 



AN 04); 



AN 04), later released as 



1685 ^^^^HJAN 04), later released as 



1687 ^^^^HJAN 04), later released as 



H)8^^^^^^MjAN 04), later released as 

FEBO^^^^HHlI^HlOQOpHBlAN 04); 

■■■■■ 1656 ^BHlAN 04); |Hi^^H[^HF!^B^HHJAN04) 

767 As the dissemination of 21 intelligence reports suggests, information in CIA records indicates Hassan Ghul was 
cooperative prior to being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. In an interview with the CIA 
Office of Inspector General, a CIA officer familiar with Ghul’s initial interrogations stated, “He sang like a tweetie 
bird. He opened up right away and was cooperative from the outset.” ( See Dece mber 2, 2004, interview with 
[REDACTED], Chief, DO, CTC UBL Department, ) CIA records reveal that Ghul’s 

information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was disseminated while Ghul was at DETENTION SITE COBALT, prior to 
the initiation of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. On April 16, 2013, the Council on Foreign Relations 
hosted a forum in relation to the screening of the film, “Manhunt.” The forum included former CIA officer Nada 
Bakos, who states in the film that Hassan Ghul provided the critical information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti to 
Kurdish officials prior to entering CIA custody. When asked about the interrogation techniques used by the Kurds, 



Page 130 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




































UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET - # 



// NOF O R N 



Peshawar area,” and that “it was well known that he was always with Abu Ahmed [al- 
Kuwaiti].” 768 Ghul described Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti as UBL’s “closest assistant,” 769 who 
couriered messages to al-Qa’ida’s chief of operations, and listed al-Kuwaiti as one of three 
individuals likely with UBL. 770 Ghul further speculated that: 

“UBL’s security apparatus would be minimal, and that the group likely 
lived in a house with a family somewhere in Pakistan. ... Ghul speculated 
that Abu Ahmed likely handled all of UBL’s needs, including moving 
messages out to Abu Faraj [al-Libi]....” 771 

During this same period, prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, Ghul provided information related to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Abu 
Faraj al-Libi (including his role in delivering messages from UBL), Jaffar al-Tayyar, ‘Abd al- 
Hadi al-Iraqi, Hamza Rabi’a, Shaik Sa’id al-Masri, Sharif al-Masri, Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman al- 
Najdi, Abu Talha al-Pakistani, and numerous other al-Qa’ida operatives. He also provided 
information on the locations, movements, operational security, and training of al-Qa’ida leaders 
living in Shkai, Pakistan, as well as on the visits of other leaders and operatives to Shkai. 772 
Ghul’s reporting on Shkai, which was included in at least 16 of the 21 intelligence reports, 773 
confirmed earlier reporting that the Shkai valley served as al-Qa’ida’s command and control 
center after the group’s 2001 exodus from Afghanistan. 774 Notwithstanding these facts, in March 



Bakos stated: “. . .honestly, Hassan Ghul. . .when he was being debriefed by the Kurdish government, he literally 
was sitting there having tea. He was in a safe house. He wasn’t locked up in a cell. He wasn’t handcuffed to 
anything. He was — he was having a free flowing conversation. And there’s — you know, there’s articles in Kurdish 
papers about sort of their interpretation of the story and how forthcoming he was.” {See 

www.cfr.org/counterterrorism/film-screening-manhunt/p30560.) Given the unusually high number of intelligence 
reports disseminated in such a short time period, and the statements of former CIA officer Bakos, the Committee 
requested additional information from the CIA on Ghul’s interrogation prior to entering CIA custody. The CIA 
wrote on October 25, 2013: ‘‘We have not identified any information in our holdings suggesting that Hassan Gul 
first provided information on Abu Ahmad while in [foreign] custody.” No information was provided on Hassan 
Ghul’s intelligence reporting while in U.S. military detention. See DTS #2013-3152. 

AN 04) 

AN 04) 

AN 04) 

JAN 04) 

AN 1 654 



768 HEADQUARTERS 

769 

770 




AN 04) 

AN 04); 
JAN 04) 

AN 04) 

AN 04) 

JAN 04) 

AN 04) 

AN 04) 

AN 04) 




AN 04); 
AN 04); 



AN 04); 
JAN 04); 

' AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 
JAN 04) 



774 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Detainee Profile on Hassan Ghul for coord; date: 
December 30, 2005, at 8:14:04 AM. 

Page 131 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



2005, the CIA represented to the Department of Justice that Hassan Ghul’s reporting on Shkai 
was acquired “after” the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 775 



After two days of questioning at DETENTION SITE COBALT 
and the dissemination of 21 intelligence reports, Ghul was transferred to DETENTION SITE 
BLACK. 776 According to CIA records, upon arrival, Ghul was “shaved and barbered, stripped, 
and placed in the standing position against the wall” with “his hands above his head” with plans 
to lower his hands after two hours. 777 The CIA interrogators at the detention site then requested 
to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Ghul, writing: 



“[the] interrogation team believes, based on [Hassan Ghul’s] reaction to the 
initial contact, that his al-Qa’ida briefings and his earlier experiences with U.S 
military interrogators have convinced him there are limits to the physical 
contact interrogators can have with him. The interrogation team believes the 
approval and employment of enhanced measures should sufficiently shift 
[Hassan Ghul’s] paradigm of what he expects to happen. The lack of these 
increasd [sic] measures may limit the team’s capability to collect critical and 
reliable information in a timely manner.” 778 



CIA Headquarters approved the request the same day. 779 
Following 59 hours of sleep deprivation, 780 Hassan Ghul experienced hallucinations, but was told 
by a psychologist that his reactions were “consistent with what many others experience in his 
condition,” and that he should calm himself by telling himself his experiences are normal and 
will subside when he decides to be truthful. 781 The sleep deprivation, as well as other enhanced 
interrogations, continued, 782 as did Ghul’s hallucinations. 783 Ghul also complained of back pain 
and asked to see a doctor, 784 but interrogators responded that the “pain was normal, and would 
stop when [Ghul] was confirmed as telling the truth.” A cable states that “[i Interrogators told 
[Ghul] they did not care if he was in pain, but cared only if he provided complete and truthful 
information.” 785 A CIA physician assistant later observed that Hassan Ghul was experiencing 
“notable physiological fatigue,” including “abdominal and back muscle pain/spasm, ‘heaviness’ 
and mild paralysis of arms, legs and feet [that] are secondary to his hanging position and extreme 



775 March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from Legal Group, DCI 

Counterterrorist Center, re: Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques. Italics in original. 
Fo r additional re prese ntations, se e Volume II. 

AN 04) 

AN 04) 

| JAN 04) 

JAN 04) 

JAN 04) 

JAN 04) 

JAN 04); 1312 JAN 04). The CIA’s June 2013 Response 

states that when hallucinations occurred during sleep deprivation, “medical personnel intervened to ensure a 
detainee would be allowed a period of sleep.” As described in this summary, and more extensively in Volume III, 
CIA records indicate that medical personnel did not always intervene and allow detainees to sleep after experiencing 
hal lucinations. 

784 1299 JAN 04) 

785 1299 JAN 04). See Volume III for similar statements made to CIA detainees. 

m ii 1 1 ii i i 1 i n ii i in 1 1 

Page 132 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



degree of sleep deprivation,” but that Ghul was clinically stable and had “essentially normal vital 
signs,” despite an “occasional premature heart beat” that the cable linked to Ghul’s fatigue. 786 
Throughout this period, Ghul provided no actionable threat information, and as detailed later in 
this summary, much of his reporting on the al-Qa’ida presence in Shkai was repetitive of his 
reporting prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Ghul also provided no 
other information of substance on UBL facilitator Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. 787 Nonetheless, on 
May 5, 2011, the CIA provided a document to the Committee entitled, “Detainee Reporting on 
Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” which lists Hassan Ghul as a CIA detainee who was subjected to the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and wknsrovidecDTiei^ne’M^ 

Abu Ahmad to B in Ladin.” 788 Hassan Ghul was and 

later released. 789 ^ 



6. Other Detainees Wrongfully Held in 2004; CIA Sources Subjected to the CIA ’s Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques; CIA Officer Testifies that the CIA Is “Not Authorized” “to Do 
Anything Like What You Have Seen ” in Abu Ghraib Photographs 

) In March 2004, the CIA took custody of an Afghan national who 
had sought employment at a U.S. military base because he had the same name (Gul Rahman) as 
an individual believed to be targeting U.S. military forces in Afghanistan. 791 During the period 
in which the Afghan was detained, the CIA obtained signals intelligence of their true target 
communicating with his associates. DNA results later showed conclusively that the Afghan in 
custody was not the target. Nonetheless, the CIA held the detainee in solitary confinement for 
approximately a month before he was released with a nominal payment. 792 

s P r i n g °f 2004, after two detainees were transferred to CIA 
custody, CIA interrogators proposed, and CIA Headquarters approved, using the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques on one of the two detainees because it might cause the detainee to 
provide information that could identify inconsistencies in the other detainee’s story. 793 After 
both detainees had spent approximately 24 hours shackled in the standing sleep deprivation 
position, CIA Headquarters confirmed that the detainees were former CIA sources. 794 The two 
detainees had tried to contact the CIA on multiple occasions prior to their detention to i nform th e 
CIA of their activities and provide intelligence. The messages they had sent to the CIA HHI 



786 ■■ 1308 JAN 04) 

787 See Volume II for additional information. 

788 See CIA letter to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, dated May 5, 201 1, which includes a document 
entitled, “Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti,” with an accompanying six-page chart 
entitled, “Detainee ReportingonAb^Ahmed al-Kuwaiti” (DTS #2011-2004) 

789 2441 HEADQUARTERS 1635 



B 1712 HEAD QUARTERS 



790 See 

791 The individual detained and the individual believed to be targeting U.S. forces were different from the Gul 
Rahman who died at DETENTION SITE COBALT. 

2035 

793 ([REDACTED]) 

794 I I I III l II Mil 



Page 133 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



MM were n ot translated until after the detainees were subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 795 

During this same period in early 2004, CIA interrogators 
interrogated Adnan al-Libi, a member of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group. CIA Headquarters 
did not approve the use of the CIA’s enhanced techniques against al-Libi, but indicated that 
interrogators could use “standard” interrogation techniques, which included up to 48 hours of 
sleep deprivation. 796 CIA interrogators subsequently reported subjecting Adnan al-Libi to sleep 
deprivation sessions of 46.5 hours, 24 hours, and 48 hours, with a combined three hours of sleep 
between sessions. 797 



Beginning in late April 2004, a number of media outlets published 
photographs of detainee abuse at the Department of Defense-run Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. The 
media reports caused members of the Committee and individuals in the executive branch to focus 
on detainee issues. On May 12, 2004, the Committee held a lengthy hearing on detainee issues 
with Department of Defense and CIA witnesses. The CIA used the Abu Ghraib abuses as a 
contrasting reference point for its detention and interrogation activities. In a response to a 
question from a Committee member, CIA Deputy Director McLaughlin said, “we are not 
authorized in [the CIA program] to do anything like what you have seen in those 
photographs.” 798 In response, a member of the Committee said, “I understand,” and expressed 
the understanding, consistent with past CIA briefings to the Committee, that the “norm” of CIA’s 
interrogations was “transparent law enforcement procedures [that] had developed to such a high 
level. . . that you could get pretty much what you wanted.” The CIA did not correct the 
Committee member’s misunderstanding that CIA interrogation techniques were similar to 
techniques used by U.S. law enforcement. 799 

7. The CIA Suspends the Use of its Enhanced Interrogation Techniques , Resumes Use of the 
Techniques on an Individual Basis; Interrogations are Based on Fabricated, Single 
Source Information 



In May 2004, the OLC, then led by Assistant Attorney General 
Jack Goldsmith, informed the CIA’s Office of General Counsel that it had never formally opined 
on whether the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in the CIA’s program was 



([REDACTED]). For more information on AL-TURKI and AL-MAGREBI, see 



In November 2003, CIA 
suggesting “changing the sleep deprivation line 




795 HEADQUARTERS 
Volume III. 

796 See Volume I and II, including HEADQUA RTERS 
General Counsel Scott Muller sent an email to 

a^ic^etweer^nhanced and standard from 72 to 48 hours.” ( See November 23, 2003, email from Scott Muller to 
cc: John Rizzo, Subject: Al-Hawsawi Incident.) On January 10, 2004, CIA Headquarters 
informed CIA detention sites of the change, stating that sleep deprivat ion over 48 hours would now be considered an 
“enhanced” interrogation technique. See HEADQUARTERS 

797 




101713Z JAN 04). 

1889 (091836Z MAR 04). 



1888 (091823Z MAR 04); 

There is no indication in CIA records that CIA Headquarters addressed the repeated use of “standard” sleep 
deprivation against Adnan al-Libi. For more information, see Volume IE detainee report for Adnan al-Libi. 

798 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing, May 12, 2004 (DTS #2004-2332). 

799 Transcript of Senate Select Committee or^ntelligenc^iea^^ (DTS #2004-2332). 

TOP 

Page 134 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFOR N 



consistent with IJ.S. constitutional standards. 800 Goldsmith also raised concerns about 
divergences between the CIA’s proposed enhanced interrogation techniques, as described in the 
August 1, 2002, memorandum, and their actual application, as described in the CIA Inspector 
General’s Special Review. 801 In late May 2004, DCI Tenet suspended the use of the CIA’s 
“enhanced” and “standard” interrogation techniques, pending updated approvals from the 
OLC. 802 On June 4, 2004, DCI Tenet issued a formal memorandum suspending the use of the 
CIA’s interrogation techniques, pending policy and legal review. 803 The same day, the CIA 
sought reaffirmation of the program from the National Security Council. 804 National Security 
Advisor Rice responded, noting that the “next logical step is for the Attorney General to 
complete the relevant legal analysis now in preparation.” 805 



Q On June 2004, a foreign government captured Janat Gul, an 



individual believed, based on reporting from a CIA source, to have information about al-Qa’ida 
plans to attack the United States prior to the 2004 presidential election. 806 In October 2004, the 
CIA source who provided the information on the “pre-election” threat and implicated Gul and 
others admitted to fabricating the information. However, as early as March 2004, CIA officials 
internally expressed doubts about the validity of the CIA source’s information. 807 



On July 2, 2004, the CIA met with National Security Advisor Rice, 
other National Security Council officials, White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, as well as the 
attorney general and the deputy attorney general, to seek authorization to use the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, specifically on Janat Gul. 808 The CIA represented that CIA 



800 May 25, 2004, Talking Points for DCI Telephone Conversation with Attorney General: DOJ’s Legal Opinion re 
CIA’s Counterterrorist Program (CT) Interrogation. Letter from Assistant Attorney General Jack L. Goldsmith III to 
Director Tenet, June 18, 2004 (DTS #2004-2710). 

801 May 27, 2004, letter from Assistant Attorney General Goldsmith to General Counsel Muller. 



802 



May 24, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from | 



|, subject: Memorandum of Meeting with the 



DCI Regarding DOJ’s Statement that DOJ has Rendered No Legal Opinion on Whether CIA’s Use of Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques would meet Constitutional Standards. Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations 
from Director of Central Intelligence, June 4, 2004, re: Suspension of Use of Interrogation Techniques. 

803 June 4, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Director of Central Intelligence, re: 
Suspension of Use of Interrogation Techniques. On June 2, 2004, George Tenet informed the President that he 
intended to resign from his position on July 11, 2004. The White House announced the resignation on June 3, 2004. 

804 June 4, 2004, Memorandum for the National Security Advisor from DCI George Tenet, re: Review of CIA 
Interrogation Program. 

805 June 2004, Memorandum for the Honorable George J. Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence from Condoleezza 
Rice, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, re: Review of CIA’s Interrogation Program. 




ALEC 





3121 



807 The former chief of the CIA’s Bin Ladin Unit wrote in a March 2004, email that the reporting was “vague” 
and “worthless in terms of actionable intelligence.” He suggested that the reporting “would be an easy way [for al- 
Qa’ida] to test” the loyalty of th e source, given al -Qa’ida’s knowledge that leaked threat reporting “causes panic in 
Washington.” (See email from: to: HIHIHHIII^I’ [REDACTED], 

[ASSET Y ] and [source name REDACTED]?; 
expr essed similar doubt s in 
cc: 



|; subject: could AQ be testin 
|, 2004, at 06:55 AM.) ALEC Station officer 
response to the email. See email from 
BIH’ [REDACTED], 

REDACTED]?; date: March 



|, 2004, at 07:52:32 AM). See also | 

808 July 2, 2004, CIA Memorandum re Meeting with National Adviser Rice in the White House Situation Room, re 
Interrogations and Detainee Janat Gul, Jul y 2, 2004. 

TOP 

Page 135 of 499 



date: March 





subject: Re: could AQ be testing [ASSET Y] and [source name 

1411 (I 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



“interrogations have saved American lives,” that more than half of the CIA detainees would not 
cooperate until they were interrogated using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 809 and 
that “unless CIA interrogators can use a full range of enhanced interrogation methods, it is 
unlikely that CIA will be able to obtain current threat information from Gul in a timely 
manner.” 810 Janat Gul was not yet in CIA custody. 811 



On July 6, 2004, National Security Advisor Rice sent a 
memorandum to DCI Tenet stating that the CIA was “permitted to use previously approved 
enhanced interrogation methods for Janat Gul, with the exception of the waterboard.” Rice 
offered “to assist [the CIA] in obtaining additional guidance from the Attorney General and NSC 
Principals on an expedited basis” and noted the CIA’s agreement to provide additional 
information about the waterboard technique in order for the Department of Justice to assess its 
legality. Rice’s memorandum further documented that the CIA had informed her that “Gul 
likely has information about preelection terrorist attacks against the United States as a result of 
Gul’s close ties to individuals involved in these alleged plots.” 812 

In a meeting on July 20, 2004, National Security Council 
principals, including the vice president, provided their authorization for the CIA to use its 
enhanced interrogation techniques — again, with the exception of the waterboard — on Janat Gul. 
They also directed the Department of Justice to prepare a legal opinion on whether the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques were consistent with the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to 
the U.S. Constitution. 813 On July 22, 2004, Attorney General John Ashcroft sent a letter to 
Acting DCI John McLaughlin stating that nine interrogation techniques (those addressed in the 
August 1, 2002, memorandum, with the exception of the waterboard) did not violate the U.S. 
Constitution or any statute or U.S. treaty obligations, in the context of the interrogation of Janat 
Gul. 814 For the remainder of 2004, the CIA used its enhanced interrogation techniques on three 
detainees — Janat Gul, Sharif al-Masri, and Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani — with individualized 
approval from the Department of Justice. 815 

After being rendered to CIA custody on July 2004, Janat Gul 
was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including continuous sleep 
deprivation, facial holds, attention grasps, facial slaps, stress positions, and walling, 816 until he 



809 At the time of this CIA representation, the CIA had held at least 109 detainees and subjected at least 33 of them 
(30 percent) to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

810 July 6, 2004, Memorandum from Condoleezza Rice, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, to 
the Honorable George Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence, re Janat Gul. CIA Request for Guidance Regarding 
Interrogation of Janat Gul, July 2, 2004. 

811 For additional details, see Volume III. 

812 July 6, 2004, Memorandum from Condoleezza Rice, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, to 
the Honorable George Tenet, Director of Central Intelligence, re Janat Gul. 

813 July 29, 2004, Memorandum for the Record from CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, “Principals Meeting 
relating to Janat Gul on 20 July 2004.” 

814 The one-paragraph letter did not provide legal analysis or substantive discussion of the interrogation techniques. 
Letter from Attorney General Ashcroft to Acting DCI McLaughlin, July 22, 2004 (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 4). 

815 See Volume III for additional details. 




Page 136 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



experienced auditory and visual hallucinations. 817 According to a cable, Janat Gul was “not 
oriented to time or place” and told CIA officers that he saw “his wife and children in the mirror 
and had heard their voices in the white noise.” 818 The questioning of Janat Gul continued, 
although the CIA ceased using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques for several days. 
According to a CIA cable, “[Gul] asked to die, or just be killed.” 819 After continued 
interrogation sessions with Gul, on August 19, 2004, CIA detention site personnel wrote that the 
interrogation “team does not believe [Gul] is withholding imminent threat information.” 820 On 
August 21, 2004, a cable from CIA Headquarters stated that Janat Gul “is believed” to possess 
threat information, and that the “use of enhanced techniques is appropriate in order to obtain that 
information.” 821 On that day, August 21, 2004, CIA interrogators resumed using the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against Gul. 822 Gul continued not to provide any reporting on 
the pre-election threat described by the CIA source. 823 On August 25, 2004, CIA interrogators 
sent a cable to CIA Headquarters stating that Janat Gul “may not possess all that [the CIA] 
believes him to know.” 824 The interrogators added that “many issues linking [Gul] to al-Qaida 
are derived from single source reporting” (the CIA source). 825 Nonetheless, CIA interrogators 
continued to question Gul on the pre-election threat. According to an August 26, 2004, cable, 
after a 47-hour session of standing sleep deprivation, Janat Gul was returned to his cell, allowed 
to remove his dia per, given a towel and a meal, and permitted to sleep. 826 In October 2004, the 
CIA conducted a BBiB of the CIA sou rce who had identified Gul as having knowledge of 
attack planning for the pre-election threat. the CIA source admitted to 

fabricating the information, 827 Gul was subsequently transferred to a foreign government. On 
BHHBiBi nform ed the CIA that Janat Gul had been released. 828 

-tanat Gul never provided the threat information the CIA originally 
told the National Security Council that Gul possessed. Nor did the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Gul produce the “immediate threat information that could save 
American lives,” which had been the basis for the CIA to seek authorization to use the 
techniques. As described elsewhere in this summary, the CIA’s justification for employing its 
enhanced interrogation techniques on Janat Gul — the first detainee to be subjected to the 
techniques following the May 2004 suspension — changed over time. After having initially cited 
Gul’s knowledge of the pre-election threat, as reported by the CIA’s source, the CIA began 
representing that its enhanced interrogation techniques were required for Gul to deny the 
existence of the threat, thereby disproving the credibility of the CIA source. 829 




). See Volume I II for additional inf ormation. 

5492 |BHH^B 

829 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorne^General^ffic^^ega^ounsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 

Page 137 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



# NQFORN 



c ) On August 11, 2004, in the midst o f the interrog ation of Janat Gul 

wrote a letter 



using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, CIA attorney 
to Acting Assistant Attorney General Dan Levin with “brief biographies” of four individuals 
whom the CIA hoped to detain. Given the requirement at the time that the CIA seek individual 
approval from the Department of Justice before using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques against a detainee, the CIA letter states, “[w]e are providing these preliminary 
biographies in preparation for a future request for a legal opinion on their subsequent 
interrogation in CIA control.” Two of the individuals — Abu Faraj al-Libi and Hamza Rabi’a — 
had not yet been captured, and thus the “biographies” made no reference to their interrogations 
or the need to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The third individual, Abu Talha 
a^akistanvwasinforcign government custody. His debriefings by a foreign government, | 

were described in the letter as “only moderately effective” because Abu 
Talha was “distracting [those questioning him] with noncritical information that is truthful, but is 
not related to operational planning.” The fourth individual, Ahmed Khalfan Ghaila ni, was al so 
ir^oreign government custody and being debriefed by foreign government officials H|fl[| 
Hl||. According to the letter, Ghailani’ s foreign government debriefings were “ineffective” 
because Ghailani had “denied knowledge of current threats.” The letter described reporting on 
the pre-election threat — much of which came from the CIA source — in the context of all four 
individuals. 830 Ahmed Ghailani and Abu Faraj al-Libi were eventually rendered to CIA custody 
and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 



(TS/4|||||||HH^^H^E) September ■ 2004, after the CIA had initiated a 
counterintelligence revie w of the CI A source who had reported on the pre-election threat, but 
prior to the CIA source’s the CIA took custody of Sharif al-Masri, whom the CIA 

source had reported would also have information about the threat. 831 Intelligence provided by 
Sharif al-Masri while he was in foreign government custody resulted in the dissemination of 
more than 30 CIA intelligence reports. 832 After entering CIA custody, Sharif al-Masri expressed 
his intent to cooperate with the CIA, indicating t hat he was frighte ned of interrogations because 
he had been tortured while being interrogated in I^HiHHft 833 The CIA nonetheless 
sought approval to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against al-Masri because of 
his failure to provide information on the pre-election threat. 834 

After approximately a week of interrogating al-Masri using the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including sleep deprivation that coincided with 



United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees, at 1 1. See section of this summary and Volume II 
entitled, “The Assertion that CIA Detainees Subjected to Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Help Validate CIA 
Sources.” 

■RHB, Assistant General Counsel, to Dan Levin, Acting Assistant Attorney General, 



830 Letter from | 
■HI. 2004. 

831 WASHINGTON 



19045 



|MAR 04). See HEADQUARTERS 




Page 138 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



auditory hallucinations, CIA interrogators reported that al-Masri had been “motivated to 

B ipate” at the time of his arrival. 835 Despite al-Masri’s repeated descriptions of torture in 
, the CIA transferred al-Masri to that government’s custody after approximately three 
months of CIA detention. 836 

) As in the case of Janat Gul and Sharif al-Masri, the CIA’s requests 
for OLC advice on the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Ahmed 
Khalfan Ghailani were based on the fabricated reporting on the pre-election threat from the same 
CIA source. 837 Like Janat Gul and Sharif al-Masri, Ghailani also experienced auditory 
hallucinations following sleep deprivation. 838 As described in this summary, after having opined 
on the legality of using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on these three individual 
detainees, the OLC did not opine again on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation program until May 
2005. 

8. Country t | Detains Individuals on the CIA 's Behalf 



) Consideration of a detention facility in Country | began in H 
2003, when the CIA sought to t ransfer Ramzi bin al-Shibh from the custody of a foreign 
government to CIA custody. 839 which had not yet informed the 



country’ spolitical leadership of the CIA’s request to establish a clandestine detention facility in 
Country |, surveye d pot ential sites for the facility, while the CIA set aside $| million for its 
construction. 840 In 2003, the CIA arranged for a “temporary patch” involving placing two 
CIA detainees (Ramzi bin al-Shibh and ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri) within an already existing 
Country | detention facility, until the CIA’s own facilitycouldbebuilt/ 41 That spring, as the 
CIA was offering millions of dollars in subsidies to in Countries |, |, and 



CIA was offering millions of dollars in subsidies to 



3289 For more information, see Volume III, detainee report for 

Sharif al-Masri. 

836 HEADQUARTER^ 

837 See letter from Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Dan Levin, ActineAssistant Attorney 

General, August 25, 2004 (DTS #2009-1809^(Note: At various times during this periocjj^^^^hs identified as 
both CIA associate general counsel and Legal). See also a letter from Assistant 

General Counsel, to Dan Levin, Acting Assistant Attorney General, September 5, 2004 (DTS #2009-1809). A CIA 
email sent prior to the CIA’s request for advice from the OLC indicated that the judgment that Ghailani had 
knowledge of terrorist plotting was speculative: “Although Ghailani’s role in operational planning is unclear, his 
respected role in al-Qa’ida and presence in Shkai as recently as October 2003 may have provided him some 
knowledge about ongoing a ttack planningagainsttheUnited States homeland^m^h^peratives involved.” (See 
email from: HHHIHI’ CTC/UBLD (formerly ALEC^^^^H^|^|; to: [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: derog information for ODDO on Talha, Ghailani, Hamza 
Rabf^n^Ab^arai^ate: AugusnO^OO^^Ghailani was rendered to CIA custody on September ®2004. (See 

3072 The CIA began using its enhanced interrogation techniques 

on Ghailani on September 17, 2004, as the CIA was initiatingitf^ountenntell^ of the source who 

provided the false reporti^onthe^ threat5^JHHHHH|fiH^P 3 1 89 (181558Z SEP 04); 

HEADQUARTERS 04); ^^^^■4267^^^^B04). 

838 [REDACTED] 3221 

839 [REDACTED] 22343 

840 HEADQUARTERS 

841 HEADQUARTERS 

842 While CIA Headquarters offered $| million to Country | for hosting a CIA detention facility, 
precluded the opening of the facility. Only $| million was made available to the CIA Station for support to the 






Page 139 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP-g E G RE - T// 



#NOFORN 



CIA Headquarters directed the CIA Stati on in Country | to “t hink big” about how CIA 
Headquarters could support Country |*s HHHlHH- 843 After the Station initially 
submitted relatively modest proposals, CIAHeadquarters reiterated the directive, adding that the 
Station shoul^mvid^“wish list.” 844 h^M^003, the Station proposed a more expansive $| 
million in subsidies. 845 ^Usubsidy payments, intended in part as 

compensation for support of the CIA detention program, rose as high as million. 846 By 

2003, after an extension of five months beyond the originally agreed upon timeframe 
for concluding CIA detention activities in Country |, both bin al-Shibh and al-Nashiri had been 
transferred out of Country | to the CIA detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. 847 

9. U.S. Supreme Court Action in the Case of Rasul v. Bush Forces Transfer of CIA 
Detainees from Guantanamo Bay to Country | 



Beginning in September 2003, the CIA held a number of detainees 
at CIA facilities on the grounds of, but separate from, the U.S. military detention facilities at 
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. 848 In early January 2004, the CIA and the Department of Justice began 
discussing the possibility that a pending U.S. Supreme Court case, Rasul v. Bush, might grant 
habeas corpus rights to the five CIA detainees then being held at a CIA detention facility at 



mtKKKm although CIA Headquarters asked the CIA Station to “advise if additional funds may be needed to 
keep [the facility] viable over the coming year and beyond.” CIA Headquarters added, “we cannot have enough 
blacksite hosts, and we are loathe to let one we have slip away. ” Country M never hosted CIA detainees. See 
HEADQUAR ■■■■^■■11; [REDACTED] 5298 ■■■■■1; HEADQUAR | 



843 ALEC 03). In an interview on the CIA program, noted that the 

program had “more money than we could possibly spend we thought, and it turned out to be accurate.” In the same 



interview, he stated that 





I’m not about to count 
did not identify the 

(RJ) - October 




)Ugl 

$■, 000, 000 

self a nd Jos6 [Rodriguez] 

We never counted it 

that kind of money for a receipt.” The boxes contained one hundred dollar bills 
recipient of the million. See transcript of Oral History Interview, Interviewee: 

13, 2006, Interviewer: [REDACTE D] and [REDACTED]. 

ALEC ■^^^■03) 

845 alec m 

846 See DTS #2010-244 8. 

847 [REDACTED] 2498 ■^■■■1 

848 April 2003, Memorandum for Director, PCI Countert errorist Center, from Chief 

Renditions and Detainee^roumvia^^B^^^^^^JH’ Counterterrorist Center, Chief of Operations, m 
HHfl, Chief, |[|||m^m^^HHBSu^ec^^equesO^Relocat^IigIEVa]ue Detainees to an Interim 
Detention Facility at Guantanamo. See also DIRECTOR CIA detainees were held at 

two facilities at Guantanamo Bay, DETENTION SITE MAROON and DETENTIO N SITE INDIGO. { See 
Quarterly Review of Confinement Conditions for CIA Detainees, Coverage Period: A third 

CIA detention facility, DETENTION SITE REDl 




and September 1, 2006, Memorandum of Agreement Between the Department of Defense (DOD) and the Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA) Concerning the Detention by DOD of Certain Terrorists at a Facility at Guantanamo Bay 
Naval Station. 

INI II III I 

Page 140 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



Guantanamo Bay. 849 Shortly after these discussions, CIA officers approached the 
in Country | to determine if it would again be willing to host these CIA detainees, who would 
remain in CIA custody within an already existing Country | facility. 850 By January 2004, the 
Country | had agreed to this arrangement for a limited period of time. 851 

) Meanwhile, CIA General Counsel Scott Muller asked the 
Department of Justice, the National Security Council, and the White House Counsel for advice 
on whether the five CIA detainees being held at Guantanamo Bay should remain at Guantanamo 
Bay or be moved pending the Supreme Court’s decision. 852 After consultation with the U.S. 
solicitor general in February 2004, the Department of Justice recommended that the CIA move 
four detainees out of a CIA detention facility at Guantanamo Bay pending the Supreme Court’s 
resolution of the case. 853 The Department of Justice concluded that a fifth detainee, Ibn Shaykh 
al-Libi, did not need to be transferred because he had originally been detained under military 
authority and had been declared to the ICRC. 854 Nonetheless, by April 2004, all five CIA 
detainees were transferred from Guantanamo Bay to other CIA detention facilities. 855 



Country 



m^/NF) Shortly after placing CIA detainees within an alread y existing 
facility for a second time, tensions arose between the CIA and Country | 



iMM In 2004, CIA detainees in a Count 
pain from other detainees presumed to be in the 
facility. 857 When the CIA chief of Station approached the 



facility claimed to hear cries of 



849 Email from: Scott W. Muller; to: [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Detainees in 

Gitmo; date: January |, 2004. 

850 See HEADQUARTERS [REDACTED] 1S45 The CIA’s long- 

term facility in Country which the CIA Station in Countr^hia^warned was a drain on the Station’s resources, 
had not yet been completed. See [REDACTED] 1785 

851 [REDACTED] 1679 

852 Email from: Scott Muller; to: Jam es Pavitt, 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

February |, 2004. 

853 Email from: Scott Muller; to: Jam es Pavitt, 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

February |, 2004. 

854 Email from: Scott Muller; to: Jam es Pavitt, 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

February I, 2004 



cc: Geor ge Tenet, John McLaughlin, [REDACTED], 
; subject: CIA Detainees at GITMO; date: 

cc: Geor ge Tenet, John McLaughlin, [REDACTED], 
; subject: CIA Detainees at GITMO; date: 

cc: Geor ge Tenet, John McLaughlin, [REDACTED], 
; subject: CIA Detainees at GITMO; date: 





13698 1 









; ALEC 



856 See, for example, [REDACTED] 1679 F° r additional details of the CIA s interactions with 

Country |, see Volume I. 

857 Among the detainees mak ing this claim was Ibn Shaykh al-Libi, who had previouslybeenrendered from CIA 

custody to A Libyan national, Ibn Shaykh al-Libi reported while in HHBcustody that Iraq 

was supporting al-Qa’ida and providing assistance with chemical and biological weapons. Some of this information 
was cited by Secretary Powell in his speech to the United Nations, and was used as a justification for the 2003 
invasion of Iraq. Ibn Shaykh al-Libi reca nted the cl aim after he was rendered to CIA custody on February |, 2003, 
claiming that he had been tortured by the BIHH’ and only told them what he assessed they wanted to hear. For 
more details, see Volume III. While in Country I, al-Libi told CIA debriefers that the “sobbing and yelling” he 



[REDACTED] 1898 



Page 141 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






















UNCLASSIFIED 



9HMR9MK about the accounts of the CIA detainees, the stated with “bitter 

dismay” that the bilateral relationship was being “tested.” 858 There were also counterintelligence 
concerns relating to CIA detainee Ramzi bin al-Shibh, who had attempted to influen ce a Cou ntry 
| officer. 859 These concerns contributed to a request from m HHH 

2004 for the CIA to remove all CIA detainees from Country |. 860 

(TS/n^^B^^^^^H#NPMj^^^^B2004^vhenthe chief of Station in Country | again 
approachedthe^^^H|^HB|m^|^^m^with allegations from CIA detainees 
about the mistreatment of Country | detainees^^^^B in the facility, the chief of Station 
received an angry respo nse that, as he rep orted to CIA Headquarters, “starkly illustrated the 
inherent challenges [of] 






























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



L. The Pace of CIA Operations Slows; Chief of Base Concerned About “Inexperienced, 
Marginal, Underperforming” CIA Personnel; Inspector General Describes Lack of 
Debriefers As “Ongoing Problem” 



fa faH °f 2004, CIA officers began considering “end games,” or 
the final disposition of detainees in CIA custody. A draft CIA presentation for National Security 
Council principals dated August 19, 2004, identified the drawbacks of ongoing indefinite 
detention by the CIA, including: the need for regular relocation of detainees, the “tiny pool of 
potential host countries” available “due to high risks,” the fact that “prolonged detention without 
legal process increases likelihood of HVD health, psychological problems [and] curtails intel 
flow,” criticism of the U.S. government if legal process were delayed or denied, and the 
likelihood that the delay would “complicate, and possibly reduce the prospects of successful 
prosecutions of these detainees.” 867 CIA draft talking points produced a month later state that 
transfer to Department of Defense or Department of Justice custody was the “preferred endgame 
for 13 detainees currently in [CIA] control, none of whom we believe should ever leave USG 
custody.” 868 



(TS//HI 

detainees 



By the end of 2004, the overwhelming majority of CIA 
1 13 of the 119 identified in the Committee Study — had already entered CIA custody. 
Most of the detainees remaining in custody were no longer undergoing active interrogations; 
rather, they were infrequently questioned and awaiting a final disposition. The CIA took custody 
of only six new detainees between 2005 and January 2009: four detainees in 2005, one in 2006, 
and one — the CIA’s final detainee, Muhammad Rahim — in 2007. 869 



In 2004, CIA detain ees w ere beimHieldinJte at 

DETENTION SITE BLACK in Country at the ■^facility in 

Country I, as well as at detention facilities in Country DETENTION SITE VIOLET in 
Country | opened in early 2005. 870 On April 15, 2005, the chief of Base at DETENTION SITE 
BLACK in Country | sent the management of RDG an email expressing his concerns about the 
detention site and the program in general. He commented that “we have seen clear indications 
that various Headquarters elements are experiencing mission fatigue vis-a-vis their interaction 
with the program,” resulting in a “decline in the overall quality and level of experience of 
deployed personnel,” and a decline in “level and quality of requirements.” He wrote that 
because of the length of time most of the CIA detainees had been in detention, “[the] detainees 
have been all but drained of actionable intelligence,” and their remaining value was in providing 
“information that can be incorporated into strategic, analytical think pieces that deal with 
motivation, structure and goals.” The chief of Base observed that, during the course of the year, 
the detention site transitioned from an intelligence production facility to a long-term detention 
facility, which raised “a host of new challenges.” These challenges included the need to address 



867 CIA PowerPoint Presentation, CIA Detainees: Endgame Options and Plans, dated August 19, 2004. 

868 September 17, 2004, DRAFT Talking Points for the ADCI: Endgame Options and Plans for CIA Detainees. 

869 The CIA took custody of Abu Faraj al-Libi, Abu Munthir al-Magrebi, Ibrahim Jan, and Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi in 
2005, and Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi in 2006. 

870 The first detainees arrive d in C ountry B in 2003. CIA detainees w ere hel d within an existing Country 

| facility in Country | from |[| to I II 1 1 mil then again beginning in |m 2004. For additional 

information, see Volume I. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 143 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



the “natural and progressive effects of long-term solitary confinement on detainees” and ongoing 
behavioral problems. 871 




chief of Base wrote: 



With respect to the personnel at DETENTION SITE BLACK, the 



“I am concerned at what appears to be a lack of resolve at Headquarters to 
deploy to the field the brightest and most qualified officers for service at [the 
detention site]. Over the course of the last year the quality of personnel 
(debriefers and [security protective officers]) has declined significantly. With 
regard to debriefers, most are mediocre, a handfull [sic] are exceptional and 
more than a few are basically incompetent. From what we can determine there 
is no established methodology as to the selection of debriefers. Rather than 
look for their best, managers seem to be selecting either problem, 
underperforming officers, new, totally inexperienced officers or whomever 
seems to be willing and able to deploy at any given time. We see no evidence 
that thought is being given to deploying an ‘A-Team.’ The result, quite 
naturally, is the production of mediocre or, I dare say, useless intelligence.... 

We have seen a similar deterioration in the quality of the security personnel 
deployed to the site.... If this program truly does represent one of the agency’s 
most secret activities then it defies logic why inexperienced, marginal, 
underperforming and/or officers with potentially significant 
[counterintelligence] problems are permitted to deploy to this site. It is also 
important that we immediately inact [sic] some form of rigorous training 
program.” 872 



A CIA OIG audit completed in June 2006 “found that personnel 
assigned to CIA-controlled detention facilities, for the most part, complied with the standards 
and guidelines in carrying out their duties and responsibilities.” The OIG also found that, 
“except for the shortage of debriefers, the facilities were staffed with sufficient numbers and 
types of personnel.” The lack of debriefers, however, was described as “an ongoing problem” 
for the program. According to the audit, there were extended periods in 2005 when the CIA’s 
DETENTION SITE ORANGE in Country | had either one or no debriefers. At least twice in 
the summer of 2005, the chief of Station in that country requested additional debriefers, warning 
that intelligence collection could suffer. Months later, in January 2006, the chief of Base at the 
detention site advised CIA Headquarters that “the facility still lacked debriefers to support 
intelligence collection requirements, that critical requirements were ‘stacking up,’ and that gaps 
in the debriefing of detainees were impacting the quantity and quality of intelligence reporting 
and would make the work of future debriefers more difficult.” 873 



^Emailfrora: [REDACTED] (COB DETENTION SITE BLACK); to: 

subject: General Comments; date: April 15, 2005. 

^^maiHTom: [REDACTED] (COB DETENTION SITE BLACK); to: 
jBBMMMII; subject: General Comments; date: April 15, 2005. 

873 Report of Audit, CIA -controlled Detention Facilities Operated Under the 17 September 2001 Memorandum of 
Notification, Report No. 2005-0017-AS, Jun^4^006^UDT^^006-279LAs further described in the 

mrM'i m mill 

Page 144 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



//NQFORN 



M. Legal and Operational Challenges in 2005 

1. Department of Justice Renews Approval for the Use of the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques in May 2005 

(TS/^lllimilll^^^/NF) On May 10, 2005, the new acting assistant attorney general for 
OLC, Steven Bradbury, issued two legal memoranda. The first analyzed whether the individual 
use of the CIA’s 13 enhanced interrogation techniques — including waterboarding, as well as a 
number of interrogation techniques that had been used in 2003 and 2004, but had not been 
analyzed in the original August 1, 2002, OLC memorandum — were consistent with the criminal 
prohibition on torture. 874 The second memorandum considered the combined use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 875 Both legal memoranda concluded that the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques did not violate the torture statute. 

O n May 26, 2005, the CIA inspector general, who had been 
provided with the two OLC memoranda, wrote a memo to the CIA director recommending that 
the CIA seek additional legal guidance on whether the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
and conditions of confinement met the standard under Article 16 of the Convention Against 
Torture. 876 The inspector general noted that “a strong case can be made that the Agency’s 
authorized interrogation techniques are the kinds of actions that Article 16 undertakes to 
prevent,” adding that the use of the waterboard may be “cruel” and “extended detention with no 
clothing would be considered ‘degrading’ in most cultures, particularly Muslim.” The inspector 
general further urged that the analysis of conditions was equally important, noting that the 
inspector general’s staff had “found a number of instances of detainee treatment which arguably 
violate the prohibition on cruel, inhuman, and/or degrading treatment.” 877 



Committee Study, the Inspector General audit described how the CIA’s detention facilities were not equipped to 
provide detainees with medical care. The audit described unhygienic food preparation, including at a facility with a 
“rodent infestation,” and noted that a physician assistant attributed symptoms of acute gastrointestinal illness and 
giardiasis experienced by six staff and a detainee to food and water contamination. The audit further identified 
insufficient guidelines covering possible detainee escape or the death of a detainee. 

874 See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven 
G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application 
of 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al 
Qaeda Detainee. 

875 See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven 
G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application 
of 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A to the Combined Use of Certain Techniques That May Be Used in the Interrogation of 
High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

876 May 26, 2005, Memorandum for Director, Central Intelligence Agency, from John Helgerson, Inspector General, 
re: Recommendation for Additional Approach to Department of Justice Concerning Legal Guidance on Interrogation 



Techniques. 

877 May 26, 2005, Memorandum for Director, Central Intelligence Agency, from John Helgerson, Inspector General, 
re: Recommendation for Additional Approach to Department of Justice Concerning Legal Guidance on Interrogation 
Techniques. 

TOP SECRE TE— ^—^■^ NOFOI ^ N 



Page 145 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQFORN 



On May 30, 2005, a third OLC memorandum examining U.S. 
obligations under the Convention Against Torture was completed. 878 The conclusions in this 
opinion were based largely on the CIA’s representations about the effectiveness of the CIA 
interrogation program in obtaining unique and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence.” 
As described later in this summary, and in more detail in Volume II, the CIA’s effectiveness 
representations were almost entirely inaccurate. 

2. Abu Faraj Al-Libi Subjected to the CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Prior to 
Department of Justice Memorandum on U.S. Obligations Under the Convention Against 
Torture; CIA Subjects Abu Faraj Al-Libi to the CIA's Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques When He Complains of Hearing Problems 

On May 2, 2005, when Abu Faraj al-Libi, al-Qa’ida’s chief of 
operations, was captured in Pakistan, the OLC had not yet issued the three aforementioned May 
2005 legal memoranda. 879 CIA officers described Abu Faraj al-Libi ’s capture as the “most 
important al-Qa’ida capture since Khalid Shaykh Muhammad.” 880 Shortly after al-Libi’s 
capture, the CIA began discussing the possibility that Abu Faraj al-Libi might be rendered to 
U.S. custody. 881 

On May 2005, four days before the rendition of Abu Faraj al- 
Libi to CIA custody, Director of CTC Robert Grenier asked CIA Director Porter Goss to send a 
memorandum to the national security advisor and the director of national intelligence “informing 
them of the CIA’s plans to take custody of Abu Faraj al-Libi and to employ interrogation 
techniques if warranted and medically safe.” 882 On May 24, 2005, the White House informed the 
CIA that a National Security Council Principals Committee meeting would be necessary to 
discuss the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Faraj al-Libi, but the 
travel schedule of one of the principals was delaying such a meeting. 883 CIA Director Goss 
instructed CIA officers to proceed as planned, indicating that he would call the principals 
individually and inform them that, if Abu Faraj al-Libi was found not to be cooperating and there 
were no contraindications to such an interrogation, he would approve the use of all of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques other than the waterboard, without waiting for a meeting of 



878 See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven 
G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application 
of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

879 For more informationonAbu Faraj al-Libi’s detention and interrogation, see Volume III. 

880 HEADQU ARTERSHM (25 1 840ZMAY05)^ 

881 See, for example, 1085 (describing meetings on May 6 and 7, 2005). 

882 May 2005, Memorandum for Director, Central Intelligence Agency, via Acting Deputy Director, Central 
Intelligence Agency, Executive Director, Deputy Director for Operations from Robert Grenier, Director, DCI 
Counterterrorist CenteTjrejlnterrogation Plan for Abu Faraj al-Libi. 

883 Email from^^Hjjj^^^H^ to: Robert Grenier, John Mu dd, [REDACTED1 , [REDACTEDL^Hj^Hl 

■^■■■TiRED ACTED], cc: WKRUEMt 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Possible significant delay in EITs for AFAL; date: May 24, 
2005. 



T OP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 146 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T// 



//NOFOR N 



the principals. 884 Abu Faraj al-Libi was rendered to CIA custody at DETENTION SITE 
ORANGE on May 2005, 885 and transferred to DETENTION SITE BLACK on May B 

2005. 886 

(TS/^HIimH^/NF) On May |, 2005, CIA Director Goss formally notified National 
Security Advisor Stephen Hadley and Director of National Intelligence (DNI) John Negroponte 
that Abu Faraj al-Libi would be rendered to the unilateral custody of the CIA. 887 Director Goss’s 
memorandum stated: 



“[sjhould Abu Faraj resist cooperating in CIA debriefings, and pending a 
finding of no medical or psychological contraindictations [sic], to 
interrogation, I will authorize CIA trained and certified interrogators to employ 
one or more of the thirteen specific interrogation techniques for which CIA 
recently received two signed legal opinions from the Department of Justice 
(DOJ), Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) that these techniques, both individually 
and used collectively, are lawful.” 888 

The memorandum from Director Goss described Abu Faraj al-Libi 
as holding the third most important position in al-Qa’ida, and “play[ing] a leading role in 
directing al-Qa’ida’ s global operations, including attack planning against the US homeland.” 
Abu Faraj al-Libi was also described as possibly overseeing al-Qa’ida’ s “highly compartmented 
anthrax efforts.” 889 



O n May 2005, one day after al-Libi ’s arrival at DETENTION 
SITE BLACK, CIA interrogators received CIA Headquarters approval for the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Faraj al-Libi. 890 CIA interrogators began using the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Faraj al-Libi on May 28, 2005, two days before 
the OLC issued its memorandum analyzing whether the techniques violated U.S. obligations 
under the Convention Against Torture. 891 



(TSZ/^^BBI^IB^* 1 ) The CIA interrogated Abu Faraj al-Libi for more than a month 
using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. On a number of occasions, CIA 
interrogators applied the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to Abu Faraj al-Libi when he 



884 Email from 




I; to: Robert Grenier, John Mudd, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



, [REDACTED], 



cc: 




[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Possible significant delay in EITs for AFAL; date: May 24, 
2005. 




887 Memorandum for Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, Director of National Intelligence, from 
Porter Goss, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, May |, 2005, re: Interrogation Plan for Abu Faraj al-Libi. 

888 Memorandum for Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, Director of National Intelligence, from 
Porter Goss, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, May |, 2005, re: Interrogation Plan for Abu Faraj al-Libi. 

889 Memorandum for Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, Director of National Intelligence, from 
Porter Goss, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, M ay 2005, re: Interrogation Plan for Abu Faraj al-Libi. 

890 HEADQUARTERS — ' 



1 2336 (282003Z MAY 05) 

TOP SECRET // 



//NOFORN 



Page 147 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/^NOFORN 



complained of a loss of hearing, repeatedly telling him to stop pretending he could not hear 
well. 892 Although the interrogators indicated that they believed al-Libi’s complaint was an 
interrogation resistance technique, Abu Faraj al-Libi was fitted for a hearing aid after his transfer 
to U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay in 2006. 893 Despite the repeated and extensive use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Faraj al-Libi, CIA Headquarters 
continued to insist throughout the summer and fall of 2005 that Abu Faraj al-Libi was 
withholding information and pressed for the renewed use of the techniques. The use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Faraj al-Libi was eventually discontinued 
because CIA officers stated that they had no intelligence to demonstrate that Abu Faraj al-Libi 
continued to withhold information, and because CIA medical officers expressed concern that 
additional use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques “may come with unacceptable 
medical or psychological risks.” 894 After the discontinuation of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, the CIA asked Abu Faraj al-Libi about UBL facilitator Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti for the first time. 895 Abu Faraj al-Libi denied knowledge of al-Kuwaiti. 896 

3. CIA Acquires Two Detainees from the U.S. Military 

Another legal issue in late 2005 was related to the U.S. Department 
of Defense’s involvement in CIA detention activities. In September 2005, the CIA and the 
Department of Defense signed a Memorandum of Understanding on this subject, 897 and the U.S. 
military agreed to transfer two detainees, Ibrahim Jan and Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi, to CIA custody. 
Both were held by the U.S. military without being registered with the ICRC for over 30 days, 
pending their transfer to CIA custody. 898 The transfer of Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi took place 
notwithstanding Department of State concerns that the transfer would be inconsistent with 
statements made by the secretary of state that U.S. forces in Iraq would remain committed to the 
law of armed conflict, including the Geneva Conventions. 899 





894 Email from: to: [REDACTED] , [REDACTED], | 

[REDACTED], [REDACTEEqTHHHHK [REDACTED], subject: 

| Response to DDO Tasking of 7 July on Abu Faraj Interrog ation; date: July 8, 2005, at 06:16 PM . 

895 DIRECTOR ■■ (121847 Z JUL 05 ); HEADQUARTERS WKtWKlKt AN 04); ■■ 20361 
(2 91232Z JAN 04); DIRECTOR ■■ (040522Z MAY 04) 

896 ■■ 29454 (131701Z JUL 05) 

897 Memorandum of Understanding Concerning DOD Support to CIA with Sensitive Capture and Detention 

Operations in the War on Terrorism. 

898 5eeemail from: [REDACTED], ■■■; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: 

BHBlfi . [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: DoD Request for 
a list of HVTs not to be issued ISN numbers. The email stated: “In conjunction with discussions between CIA and 
DoD over the weekend regarding our request to have the military render Ibrahim Jan to our custody and NOT 
issuing him an ISN number, DoD has requested CIA provide a list of HV Ts t o whom, if captured, the military 
should NOT issue ISN numbers’’ (emphasis in onmnafySee ||H|^Jl505jHHH| OCT 05). 

899 July 2005 Memorandum for Joint Staff Interim Guidance 

Regarding 

top 

Page 148 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



In late 2005, during the period the U.S. Senate was debating the 
Detainee Treatment Act bailing “cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment,” 900 the 
CIA subjected Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi to its enhanced interrogation techniques. 901 A draft 
Presidential Daily Brief (PDB) stated that Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi provided “almost no information 
that could be used to locate former colleagues or disrupt attack plots” — the type of information 
sought by the CIA, and the CIA’s justification for the use of its enhanced interrogation 
techniques 902 Later, the statement that Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi provided “almost no information that 
could be used to locate former colleagues or disrupt attack plots” was deleted from the draft 
PDB. 903 Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi remained in CIA custody until early September 2006, when he was 
transferred to U.S. military custody in Iraq 904 

4. The CIA Seeks “ End Game ” for Detainees in Early 2005 Due to Limited Support From 
Liaison Partners 



900 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; Subject: McCain Amendment on Detainee Treatment; date: October 
6, 2005, at 12:37 PM. 

901 According to CIA records, Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi was subjected to nudity, dietary manipulation, insult slaps, 
abdominal slaps, attention grasps, facial holds, walling, stress positions, and water dousing with 44 degree 
Fahrenheit water for 18 minutes. He was shackled in the standing position for 54 hours as part of sleep deprivation, 
and experienced swelling in his lower legs requiring blood thinner and spiral ace bandages. He was moved to a 
sitting position, and his sleep deprivation was extended to 78 hours. After the swelling subsided, he was provided 
with more blood thinner and was returned to the standing position. The sleep deprivation was extended to 102 
hours. After four hours of sleep, Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi was subjected to an additional 52 hours of sleep deprivation, 
after which CIA Headquarters informed interrogators that eight hours was the minimum rest period between sleep 
deprivation sessions exceeding 48 hours. In addition to the swelling, Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi also experienced an edema 
on his head due to w alling, abra sions on his nec k, and blisters on his ankles from shackles. See 1810 

1813 DEC 05); ■■■ 1819 ^^HDEC05)J|^^1 1847 

1848 DEC 05); HEADQUARTERS^^® ■BfDEC05). See 

additional i nformati on on Abu Ja’far al-lraqi in Volume HI. 

titled: Date: December 

13, 2005, ALT ID#: -21 32586. Director Goss notified the national security advisor that he had authorized the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi because “CIA believes that Abu Ja’far possesses 
considerable operational information about Abu Mu’sab al-Zarqawi.” See December 1, 2005, Memorandum for the 
National Security Advisor, Director of National Intelligence, from Porter Goss, Central Intelligence Agency, 
subject, “Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 




DEC 05); 
DEC 05); 




903 PDB Draft titled: 



I, Date: December 16, 2005, ALT 



ID: 20051217 PDB on Abu Jafar al-Iraqi. Urging the change to the draft PDB, one of the interrogators involved in 
Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi’s interrogation wrote, “If we allow the Director to give this PDB, as it is written, to the President, 
I would imagine the President would say, ‘You asked me to risk my presidency on your interrogations, and now you 
give me this that implies the interrogations are not working. Why do we bother?’ We think the tone of the PDB 
should be tweaked. Some of the conclusions, based on our experts’ observations, should be amendec^Th^fiasfus 
half full, no t half empty, and is getting more full every day.” See email from: [REDACTED] BHHMHNH! 
|HHH; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; 
subject: PDB on [Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi]; date: December 15, 2005, at 12:25 AM. 



904 



2031 



In June 2007, inaccurate information about the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi was provided to the Committee. See CIA Re sponse to 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Questions for the Record, June 18, 2007 (DTS #2007-2564); \ 





O CT 05); 
32810 



32707 



OCT 05); 

TOP - SECRET/; 




32726 



/NOF O R N 



OCT 05); 



Page 149 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



iV NOFORN 



c ) In early 2005, the CIA again sought an “endgame” policy for its 

detainees, citing its unstable relations with host governments and its difficulty in identifying 
additional countries to host CIA detention facilities. 905 Talking points prepared for the CIA 
director for a meeting with the national security advisor made the following appeal: 



“CIA urgently needs [the President of the United States] and Principals 
Committee direction to establish a long-term disposition policy for the 12 
High-Value detainees (HVD)s we hold in overseas detention sites. Our liaison 
partners who host these sites are deeply concerned by [REDACTED] 906 press 
leaks, and they are increasingly skeptical of the [U.S. government’s] 
commitment to keep secret their cooperation.... A combination of press leaks, 
international scrutiny of alleged [U.S. government] detainee abuse, and the 
perception that [U.S. government] policy on detainees lacks direction is 
eroding our partners’ trust in U.S. resolve to protect their identities and 
supporting roles. If a [U.S. government] plan for long-term [detainee] 
disposition does not emerge soon, the handful of liaison partners who 
cooperate may ask us to close down our facilities on their territory. Few 
countries are willing to accept the huge risks associated with hosting a CIA 
detention site, so shrinkage of the already small pool of willing candidates 
could force us to curtail our highly successful interrogation and detention 
program. Fear of public exposure may also prompt previously cooperative 
liaison partners not to accept custody of detainees we have captured and 
interrogated. Establishment of a clear, publicly announced [detainee] 
‘endgame’ - one sanctioned by [the President of the United States] and 
supported by Congress - will reduce our partners’ concerns and rekindle their 
enthusiasm for helping the US in the War on Terrorism.” 907 



I* 1 March 2005, talking points prepared for the CIA director for a 
discussion with the National Security Council Principals Committee stated that it was: 



905 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that an “important factor” contributing to the slower pace of CIA detention 
operations was al-Qa’ida’s relocation to the FATA, which “made it significantly more challenging [for the Pakistani 
government] to mount capture operations resulting in renditions and detentions by the RDI program.” A review of 
CIA records by the Committee found that legal, policy, and ot her opera tional concerns dominated internal 
deliberations about the program. In 2005, CIA officers asked | 



1 officials to render two detainees to C IA 

one neither 

detainee was transferred to CIA custody. CIA officers noted that obtaining custody of detainees held by a foreign 
government during this period was becoming increasingly difficult, h ighlightin g that | 

In March 2006, Director 
of additional detainees. 

; email from: 



custody, one | 



Goss testified to the Committee that lack of space was the limiting factor in takin 



See HEADQU ARTERS 
[REDACTED], 




; HEADQUARTERS 
Hi cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 




[REDACTEDUREDACTEDL [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: for coord, pis: D/CIA 
talkin^ointsJ^H^HH|m re rendition ofl " ” 

6702(Bddfl^^(-HEADQUARTERS and transcript of Senate Select 

Committee on Intelligence briefing, March 15, 2006 (DTS #2006-1308). 

906 Text redacted by the CIA prior to provision to Committee members at the U.S. Senate. 

907 See CIA document dated, January 12, 2005, entitled, “DCI Talking Points for Weekly Meeting with National 
Security Advisor.” 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 150 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP S ECRET// 



/ / NOF O R N 



“only a matter of time before our remaining handful of current blacksite hosts 
concludes that [U.S. government] policy on [detainees] lacks direction and... 
[the blacksite hosts] ask us to depart from their soil.... Continuation of status 
quo will exacerbate tensions in these very valuable relationships and cause 
them to withdraw their critical support and cooperation with the [U.S. 
government].” 908 



During this period, the U.S. solicitor general, however, expressed 
concern that if CIA detainees were transferred back to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, they might be 
entitled to file a habeas petition and have access to an attorney. 909 Meanwhile, the National 
Security Council continued to discuss a public roll-out, and as described later in this summary, 
the CIA engaged the media directly in order to defend and promote the program 910 

The question of what to do with the remaining detainees in CIA 
custody remained unresolved throughout 2005, during which time the CIA pursued agreements 
with additional countries to establish clandestine CIA detention facilities. 911 The Detainee 
Treatment Act was passed by Congress on December 23, 2005, as part of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006. That day, the CIA suspended its interrogation program 
again. 912 As described later in this summary, in February 2006, the CIA informed the National 
Security Council principals that the CIA would not seek continued use of all of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 913 

5. Press Stories and the CIA 's Inability to Provide Emergency Medical Care to Detainees 
Result in the Closing of CIA Detention Facilities in Countries | and | 

In October 2005, the CIA learned that Washington Pos^re porter 
Dana Priest had information about the CIA’s Detentio n and Interrogation Program, IBIBSI 

The CIA then conducted a series of 

negotiations with the Washington Post in which it sought to prevent the newspaper from 
publishing information on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 914 Fearful that 



908 See CIA Talking Points for Principals Committee Meeting on Long-Term Disposition of High-Value Detainees, 
8 March 2005. 

909 See email from: to: John Rizzo; subject: Meeting this am with WH counsel on endgame 

planning; date: January 14, 2005 . 

910 Email toJ|^^HKccUREDACIED], ■■H [REDACTED], John 

A. Rizzo, HflUimH IHlilHHHlHHHHHHii subject: Re: Brokaw interview: Take 
date: April 14, 2005, at 9:22:32 AM. In 2006, Vice President Cheney expressed reservations about any public 
release of info rmation regarding the CIA program. See CIA Memorandum for the Record from [REDACTED], 
C/CTC|H, subject, “9 March 2006 Principals Committee Meeting on Detainees.” 

911 Negotiations with Countries | and | to host CIA detention facilities are described in this summary, and in 
greater detail in Volum e I. 

9,2 HEADQUARTERS (232040Z DEC 05) 

913 DDCIA Talking Points for 10 February 2006 Un-DC re Future of the CIA Counterterrorist Rendition, Detention, 
and Interrogation Program - Interrogation Te chniques. 

914 H^PQUARJIH^^^HHH|; HEADQU AR Wm HEADQUARTERS 



7NOFORN 




TOP SECRET/; 



Page 151 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 




HHHHHHBBHHHRSHHHHHHHMMMH’ the CIA recommended the 
immediate transfer of CIA detainees to Department of Defense custody. 915 When the 
Department of Defense rejected the proposal, the National Security Council dir ected the CIA to 
prepar^ther options. 916 Meanwhile, two U.S. ambassadors, one in and another in 

IHHHH’ inquired whether Secretary of State Rice had been briefed on the impending 
Washington Post article and sought to speak to the secretary herself to ensure that the CIA 
program was authorized. According to CIA documents, Secretary Rice was not aware of the 
specific countries where the CIA detention facilities were located. 917 In lieu of a phone call from 
Secretary Rice, the CIA recommended that the State Department’s Counterterrorism Coordinator 
and former CTC DDO, Henry Crumpton, call the ambassadors. 918 The Washington Post 
published an article about CIA detention sites on November 2, 2005. 919 




depended on U.S. credibility in the area of human rights. The representatives also “questioned 
whether the gravity of this potential problem is fully appreciated in Washington.” 922 



915 The other options put forward by the CIA were transfer of CIA detainees which the CIA 

anticipated would release the detainees after a short period. The CIA a lso proposed its own outright release of the 
detainees. See CIA doc ument entitled D/CIA Talki ng Points for use at|HHH Principals Meeting (2005). 

916 HEADQUARTERS 

917 Talking Points for Dr. J.D. Crouch for telephon^allstoAmbassadors in [REDACTED] regarding possibility of 

forthcoming Dana Priest press article; email from: to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTE^jUREDACTED]; subject: Phone Call with State/L re Ambassadors who want to 
speak to the SecState^ate^^^P^Hm, at 06:45 PM. 

9,8 Email from: ^^^HHKtoT[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED]; subject: Phone Call with State/L re Ambassadors who want tospeaktodieSecState; date: October 
24, 2005, at 06:45 PM; email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; cc: ■■■■■i, [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [RED ACTED]UREDACTED]URED ACTED] ; subject: Phone call from S/CT 
Amb. Hank Crumpton to Ambassador in date: November 1 , 2005, at 6:13:21 PM. 

After the subsequent press revelations, the U.S. ambassador in Country | asked again about whether the secretary of 
state had been briefed, prompting the CIA Station in Country | to note in a cable that briefin g U.S. officials outside 



I 




UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 



The CIA catalogued ho w the Wash ington Post story created 
tensions in its bilateral counterterrorism relations with |HIHi allies and determined that: 

“[t]he article is prompting our partners to reassess the benefits and costs of 
cooperating with the [U.S. government] and CIA. These services have 
conducte d aggressive, high-impa ct operations with CIA against... targets, 
including HH^HHHHft We no longer expect the services to be as 
aggressive or cooperative.” 923 

inf ormed C IA officers that press st ories on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program led 
the HU government to prohibit |^H fr° m providing “information that could lead to the 
rendition or detention of al-Qa’ida or other terrorists to U.S. Government custody for 
interrogation, including CIA and the Department of Defense.” 924 

(TS/HHH^^^^V^* 1 ) Media leaks also created tensions with countries that had hosted or 
continued to host CIA detention facilities. For example, leaks prompted Country | officials to 
convey their intent to communicate directly with the Departments of Justice an^State^They 
then formally demarched the U.S. government. 925 As late as HI 2009, the 
Country | raised with CIA Director Panetta the “proble m of the secret detention facility” that 
had “tested and strained” the bilateral partnership. The I^HIH^I °f Country | also stated 
that assurances were needed that future cooperation with the CIA would be safeguarded. 926 

(TS/Z^^^^H^^H^NT 1 ) After publication of the Washington Post article, IHHI^^^I 
Country | demanded the closure of DETENTION SITE BLACK within ■ hours. 927 The CIA 
transferred the H| remaining CIA detainees out of the facility shortly thereafter. 928 



923 [REDACTED] 

924 See email from: HHHH^^M^toUREDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTEDL^^^^HHH^ [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: 
sensitive do not fo rward - draft intel; date: April 7, 2006, at 04:12:59 AM. See also September 2, 2006, Fax from 

DD/CTC, to Steve Bradbury, John Bellinger III, Steve Cambone, forwarding September 1, 2006 
Memorandum, “Anticipated Foreign Reactions to the Public Announcement of the US Secret Terrorist Detention 



Center.” 



PH had begun raising legal and policy concerns related to fan} 
CIA in rendition, detention, and interrogation operations in Mar ch 2005. 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the 



>otential] support and assistance to the 
>fficers indicated that they believed 
| prohibited 



| from aiding or assisting in these CIA operations. For additi onal backgr ound on H legal concerns about 

; to: John A. Rizzo; cc: [REDACTED], 
date: at 

| of Country | was “very angry” 




Renditions and Detention, see email from: [REDACTEDj^OS 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: more from HHMN 
11:09 AM. 

925 “[REDACTED] article fallout.” According to CIA records, the 
about press reports, which, he believed, would be “exploited by radical elements” to “foment increased hostility 

[REDACTED]; [REDACTED] 



toward [Country |] government.” [REDACTED] DIRR 
[REDACTED]. CIA records further state that the press reporting would “put considerable strain on the 
relationship.” {See “[REDACTED] article fallout .”) Despite this record, and other records in the full Committee 
Study, the CIA’s June 2013 Response states^“[w]e found no evidence that the RDl program in any way negatively 
affected US relations overall with Countr 

926 [REDACTED] 2328 | 

927 [REDACTED] 7885 ([REDACTED] [REDACTED]) 

928 [REDACTED] 4895 ([REDACTED] [ REDACTED]) 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 153 of 499 



//NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



#NOF Q RN 




Country | officers refused to admit CIA detainee Mustafa 

Ahmad al-Hawsawi to a local hospital despite earlier discussions with country representatives 
abouUiow a detainee’s medical emergency would be handled. 930 While the CIA understood the 
■^1 officers’ reluctance to place a CIA detaine e in a l ocal hospital given media reports, CIA 
Headquarters also questioned the “willingness to participate as originally 

agreed/planned with regard to provision of emergency medical care.” 931 After failing to gain 
assistance from the Department of Defense, 932 the CIA was forced to seek assistance from three 
third-party countries in providing medical ca re to al-Hawsawi and f our other CIA detainees with 
acute ailments. Ultimately, the jCIApaidtheBB^^^^^HBi^ million for 

thc^reatment of an^^H^B^^H^^paidthe^^^^^^J^^HI^I^pproximateh 

$^■1 fo^h^reatmen^f ■■jjjjjjj^^^^^HK 934 and made arrangements for | 

■■and to be treatedin^HBl^The medical issues resulted in the closing 

of DETENTION SITE VIOLET in Country|inJ(( 2006. 936 The CIA then transferred its 
remaining detainees to DETENTION SITE BROWN. At that point, all CIA detainees were 
located in Country |. 937 



Meanwhile, the pressures on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program brought about by the Washington Pos ^ tory prompted the CIA to consider new options 
among what it called the “[dwindling pool partners willing to host CIA Blacksites.” 938 

The CIA thus renewed earlier efforts to est ablish a detention fa cility in Country |. The CIA had 
earlier provided $| million to Country |’s BIHHIB in preparation for a potential CIA 
detention site, prompting the chief of Station to comment, “Do you realize you can buy [Country 
939 On December 2005, the chief of Station in Country | met with the 
who was not concerned about the CIA’s detention of terrorists in his 
country, but wanted assurances that the CIA interrogation program did not include the use of 




429 HEADQUARTERS ([REDACTED] [REDACTED]). See also HEADQUARTERS ■■ 

([REDACTED] [REDA CTED]). 

930 [REDACTED] 5014 

931 HEADQUARTERS __ 

932 See CIA Request Letter to DOD for Medical Assistance, dated I’ 2006, from DCIA Porter Goss. This 

letter was written four days after the CIA Headquarters cable noting the emerging difficulties in relying on host- 
country medical care. See also CIA document entitled, Summary and Reflections of Chief of Medical Services on 
OMS Participation in the RDI Program. While the document is undated, it includes information updated through 
2007. 



See CIA doc ume nt entitled, “COMPE NSATION TO 



933 

934 



■■ FOR MEDICAL TREATMENT,” date not listed. 
See also CIA document entitled, “COMPENSATION TO LI AISON F OR 
MEDICAL TREATMENT,” date not listed, which indicates that the total compensation provided was 

935 Summary and Reflections of Chief of Medical Services on OMS Participation in the RDI Program. 

936 See Volume I for additional details. 

937 ■ 



4118 



938 




ebruary 2006, “Un-DC” 



|; HEADQUARTERS 

See CIA Counterterrorist Rendition, Detainee, and Interrogation Program; dated | 

Meeting slides. 

(RJ) - October 13, 2006, Interviewer: 



939 Transcript of Oral History Interview, Interviewee: 
[REDACTED] and [REDACTED]. 

TOP SECRET/, 




^N OFORN 



Page 154 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



torture. 940 In providing his approval, the agreed to a request from the chief 

of Station not to inform the U.S. ambassador in Country ( 941 The CIA also reached an 
agreement with another country, Country |, to establish a CIA detention facility in that country 
and arranged with the leadership of Country | not to inform the U.S. ambassador there. 942 The 
CIA ultimately did not detain individuals in either country. 



I* 1 l a t e October 2005, days before the publication of the 
Washington Post article, the CIA asked a separate country, Country |, to temporarily house | 
CIA detainees. 943 The chief of Station briefed the U.S. ambassador in Country |, who requested 
that the National Security Council and the White House be briefecUuUh^lan 944 There are no 
CIA records to indicate the briefing occurred. Country |’s then provided 

approval, while seeking assurances that the CIA would develop a contingency plan in case the 
detention site was exposed in the press. 945 While the CIA Station and the 



considered 



long-term CIA detention facility be established i n the countr 

approved a plan to build a CIA detention facility 

noted his ongoing concerns about the lack of a CIA “exit strategy.” 946 



in Country |, CIA Headquar ters directed tha t a 
Countr 



lack of emergency medical care for detainees, the issue that 
had forced the closing of DETENTION SITE VIOLET in Country |, was raised repeatedly in 
the context of the construction of the CIA detention facility in Country |. On March 2006, 
CIA Headquarters requested that the CIA Station in Country | ask Country | to arrange discreet 
access to the nearest hospital and medical staff. The cable stated that the CIA “look[s] forward 
to a favorable response, prior to commencing with the construction of our detention facility.” 947 
Construction nonetheless bega n on the facility without the issue of emergency medical care 
having been resolved. In Hi 2006, after the deput y chief of the C IA Station in Country |, the 
deputy chief of RDG, and an OMS officer met with officers, the Station reported 

that the establishment of emergency medical care proxi mal to the site was “not tenable.” 948 In 
July 2006, an OMS representative informed the chief of HHIHIII^^II^HBIHI at 
CIA Headquarters that the facility in Country | “should not be activated without a clear, 
committed plan for medical provider coverage.” 949 



940 [REDACTED] 1938 

941 [REDACTED] 1938 

942 [REDACTED] 3145 

943 HEADQUARTERS 

944 [REDACTED] 6481 

945 [REDACTED] 6481 

946 [REDACTED] 6877 

947 HEADQUARTERS 

948 [REDACTED] 7670 

949 See em ail from: [REDA CT ED]; to : 
|; subject: £[ 




discuss ion is also referenced in 
C/CTC^^M/RDG; subject: Site Visit to 



[RED ACTED]; cc: Hi 
, at 4:57:29 PM. The June 
I; from: 



|; Memorandum for the Record; to: C/CTC( 

|and Recommendations. As described, in June 2006, the CI A 
inspector general issued an audit that concluded that while CIA detention facilities lacked sufficient debriefers, they 
“were constructed, equipped, and staffed to securely and safely contain detainees and prompt intelligence 
exploitation of detainees.” The audit further determined that the facilities “are not equipped to provide medical 
treatment to detainees who have or developseriousphysieaU^ and operable plans are not in place 

III! Mini in Ml H 

Page 155 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFGRN 



By the time a CIA team visited the Country | detention site in late 
2006, the CIA had already invested $| million in the new facility. Describing the absence of 
adequate emergency medical care options as “unacceptable,” the chief of RDG recommended in 
a draft memo that construction efforts be abandoned for this reason. 950 The following day, an 
edited version of the same memo described the issue as a “challenge,” but did not recommend 
that the CIA cease cons tructi on of the facility. 951 The resulting CIA detention facility, which 
would eventually cost $|H million, was never used b^he CIA. Press reports about the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program that appeared in and H eventually forced the CIA 
to pass possession of the unused facility to the Country | government. 952 



In early January 2006, officials at the Department of Defense 
informed CIA officers that Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld had made a formal decision not to 
accept any CIA detainees at the U.S. military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. 953 At the time, the 
CIA was holding 28 detainees in its two remaining facilities, DETENTION SITE VIOLET, in 
Country |, and DETENTION SITE ORANGE, in Country j. 954 In preparation for a meeting 
with Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld on January 6, 2006, CIA Director Goss was provided a 
document indicating that the Department of Defense’s position not to allow the transfer of CIA 
detainees to U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay “would cripple legitimate end game 
planning” for the CIA 955 The talking points for that meeting suggested that Director Goss tell 
Secretary Rumsfeld that the: 



“only viable ‘endgame’ for continued US Government custody of these most 
dangerous terrorists is a transfer to GTMO... [a]bsent the availability of 
GTMO and eventual DoD custody, CIA will necessarily have to begin 
transferring those detainees no longer producing intelligence to third countries, 



to provide inpatient care for detainees,” and concluded that CIA detention facilities were not equipped to provide 
emergency medical care to detainees. The audit team did not visit the facility in Country but stated, with regard 
to another country, Country |, that “CIA funds have been wasted in constructing and equipping a medical facility 
that was later determined not to be a viable option for providing inpatient care for detainees.” See Report of Audit, 
CIA -controlled Detention Facilities Operated Under the 17 Septemb er 2001 Memorandum of N otification, Report 
No. 2005-0017-AS, June 14, 2006, at DTS # 2006-2793. The CIA’s supervised the 

CI A’s Rendition s and Detention Group. 

93 °HH|HP^006, Memorandum for the Record, to: C/CTC(H|, from: C/CTCHM/RDG, re: Site Visit to 
IH^^^^ndRecommendations. 

^^^^^^^BpH2006, Memorandum for the Record, to: C/CTC|^^B, from: C/CTC|^H/RDG, re: Site Visit 
to illl^lH^Vand Recommendations (2). 

952 Congressional Notification: Central Intelligenc^Agency Response to Host Country Government Order to Vacate 

an Inactiv^lacksit^etention Facility, (DTS #2009-371 1); SSCI Memorandum for the 

Record, CIA Document, RDI Program Background Brief for Leon Panetta, 2009. 

953 DCIA Talking Points for 6 January 2006 Breakfast with Secretary of Defense, re: SecDef Refusal to Take CIA 
Detainees on GTMO. 

954 See CIA Memo, “As of 01 January 2006, ther^were 28 HVDs in CIA custody.” As noted above, DETENTION 
SITE VIOLET in Country | would be closed in 2006. 

955 DCIA Talking Points for 6 January 2006 Breakfast with Secretary of Defense, re: SecDef Refusal to Take CIA 
Detainees on GTMO. 



TOP SECRET// 



flN OFORN 



Page 156 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



which may release them, or [the CIA itself may need to] outright release 
them.” 956 



After Secretary Rumsfeld declined to reconsider his decision not to 
allow the transfer of CIA detainees to U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay, CIA officers 
proposed elevating the issue to the president. CIA officers prepared talking points for Director 
Goss to meet with the president on the “Way Forward” on the program on January 12, 2006. 957 
The talking points recommended that the CIA director “stress that absent a decision on the long- 
term issue (so called ‘endgame’) we are stymied and the program could collapse of its own 
weight.” 958 There are no records to indicate whether Director Goss made this presentation to the 
president. 



) In 2005 and 2006, the CIA transferred detainees from its custody to 




at least nine countries, includin 



|, as well as to the U.S. military in Iraq. Many of these 

detainees were subsequently released. 959 By May 2006, the CIA had 1 1 detainees whom it had 
identified as candidates for prosecution by a U.S. military commission. The remaining detainees 
were described as having “repatriation options open.” 960 



6. The CIA Considers Changes to the CIA Detention and Interrogation Program Following 
the Detainee Treatment Act, Hamdan v. Rumsfeld 



Following the passage of the Detainee Treatment Act in December 
2005, the CIA conducted numerous discussions with the National Security Council principals 
about modifications to the program that would be acceptable from a policy and legal standpoint. 
In February 2006, talking points prepared for CIA Director Goss noted that National Security 
Advisor Stephen Hadley: 



“asked to be informed of the criteria CIA will use before accepting a detainee 
into its CIA Counterterrorist Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Program, 
stating that he believed CIA had in the past accepted detainees it should not 
have.” 961 



The CIA director proposed future criteria that would require not 
only that CIA detainees meet the standard in the MON, but that they possess information about 
threats to the citizens of the United States or other nations, and that detention in a CIA facility 



956 DCIA Talking Points for 6 January 2006 Breakfast with Secretary of Defense, re: SecDef Refusal to Take CIA 
Detainees on GTMO. 

957 DCIA Talking Points for 12 January 2006 Meeting with the President, re: Way Forward on Counterterrorist 
Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Program. 

958 DCIA Talking Points for 12 January 2006 Meeting with the President, re: Way Forward on Counterterrorist 
Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Program. 

959 See Volume 1 for additional details. 

960 May 18, 2006, Deputies Committee (Un-DC) Meeting, Preliminary Detainee End Game Options. For additional 
information, see Volume I. 

961 DCIA Talking Points for 9 February 2006 Un-DC, re: Future of the CIA Counterterrorist Rendition, Detention, 
and Interrogation Program - Detainees. 

TOP 

Page 157 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



wa^pprapriate for intelligence exploitation. 962 A few months later, Legal, 

■■1, wrote to Acting Assistant Attorney General Steven Bradbury suggesting a 
modified standard for applying the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The suggested new 
standard was that “the specific detainee is believed to possess critical intelligence of high value 
to the United States.” While the proposed modification included the requirement that a detainee 
have “critical intelligence of high value,” it represented an expansion of CIA authorities, insofar 
as it covered the detention and interrogation of an individual with information that “would assist 
in locating the most senior leadership of al-Qa’ida of [sic] an associated terrorist organization,” 
even if that detainee was not assessed to have knowledge of, or be directly involved in, imminent 
terrorist threats. 963 



c ) Discussions with the National Security Council principals also 
resulted in a March 2006 CIA proposal for an interrogation program involving only seven of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques: sleep deprivation, nudity, dietary manipulation, facial 
grasp, facial slap, abdominal slap, and the attention grab 964 This proposal was not acted upon at 
the time. The proposal for sleep deprivation of up to 180 hours, however, raised concerns among 
the National Security Council principals. 965 



In April 2006, the CIA briefed the president on the “current status” 
of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. According to an internal CIA review, this 
was the first time the CIA had briefed the president on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques 966 As previously noted, the president expressed concern at the April 2006 briefing 
about the “image of a detainee, chained to the ceiling, clothed in a diaper, and forced to go to the 
bathroom on himself.” 967 



(TS/^|^m[|||B/NF) On June 29, 2006, the Supreme Court issued its decision in the 
case of Hamdan v. Rumsfeld , concluding that the military commission convened to try Salim 



962 DCIA Talking Points for 9 February 2006 Un-DC, re: Future of the CIA Counterterrorist Rendition, Detention, 
and Interrogati on Progr am - Detai nees. 

963 Letter from IHfl^TC Legal to Acting Assistant Attorney General Bradbury, May 23, 2006. 

(DTS #2009-1809); Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, 
from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: 
Application of 18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May be Used in the Interrogation of a 
High Value al Qaeda Detainee (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 9), citing Fax for Daniel Levin, Acting Assistant Attorney 
GenerafOffice of Legal Counsel, fromHIHii^^ft Assistant General Counsel, CIA (Jan. 4, 2005) (‘January 4 
[Hi Fax’); Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, 
from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: 
Application of 18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to the Combined Use of Certain Techniques in the Interrogation of 
High Value al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 10); Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy 
General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of 
the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al 
Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 11). 

964 DCIA Talking Points for 9 March 2006 Principals Committee Meeting. 

965 Memorandum for the Record from [REDACTED], C/CTCH, re: 9 March 2006 Principals Committee 
Meeting on Detainees. 

966 See CIA document entitled, “DCIA Meeting with the PresidenC^ate^April 8, 2006. 

967 Email from: Grayson SWIGERT; to: [REDACTED]; cc: subject: Dr. [SWIGERT’s] 7 June 

meeting with DCI; date: June 7, 2006. 

ini' 'ii i iii i ' i iiii iiiii i 

Page 158 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET - // 



//NQFORN 



Hamdan, a detainee at Guantanamo Bay, was inconsistent with statutory requirements and 
Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. The implication of the decision was that treating 
a detainee in a manner inconsistent with the requirements of Common Article 3 would constitute 
a violation of federal criminal law. CIA attorneys analyzed the Hamdan decision, noting that it 
could have a significant impact on “current CIA interrogation practices.” 968 Their memorandum 
also referenced that Acting Assistant Attorney General Steven Bradbury had the “preliminary 
view . . . that the opinion ‘calls into real question’ whether CIA could continue its CT 
interrogation program involving enhanced interrogation techniques,” as the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques “could be construed as inconsistent with the provisions of Common 
Article 3 prohibiting ‘outrages upon personal dignity’ and violence to life and person.” 969 

The case of Hamdan v. Rumsfeld prompted the OLC to withdraw a 
draft memorandum on the impact of the Detainee Treatment Act on the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 970 The CIA did not use its enhanced interrogation techniques again 
until July 2007, by which time the OLC had interpreted the Military Commissions Act, signed by 
the president on October 17, 2006, in such a way as to allow the CIA to resume the use of the 
techniques. 971 



N. The Final Disposition of CIA Detainees and the End of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program 

1. President Bush Publicly Acknowledges the Existence of the CIA ’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program 



c ) After significant discussions throughout 2006 among the National 
Security Council principals, the Department of Defense ultimately agreed to accept the transfer 
of a number of CIA detainees to U.S. military custody. 972 



(U) On September 6, 2006, President George W. Bush delivered a public speech acknowledging 
that the United States had held al-Qaida operatives in secret detention, stating that the CIA had 
employed an “alternative set of procedures” in interrogating these detainees, and describing 
information obtained from those detainees while in CIA custody. 973 As described later in this 
summary, the speech, which was based on CIA information and vetted by the CIA, contained 



968 CIA memorandum from the CIA’s Office of General Counsel, circa June 2006, entitled, “Hamdan v. Rumsfeld.” 

969 CIA memor andum from the C IA’s Office of General CounsefcircaJune^ entitled, “Hamdan v. Rumsfeld.” 

970 Email from: to: [REDACTED]; cc: I 01111 Rizzo - subject: FW: Summary 

of Hamdan Decision; date: June 30, 2006, at 4:44 PM. Department of Justice Office of Professional Responsibility; 
Report, Investigation into the Office of Legal Counsel’s Memoranda Concerning Issues Relating to the Central 
Intelligence Agency’s Use of ‘Enhanced Interrogation Techniques’ on Suspected Terrorists, July 29, 2009 (DTS 
#2010-1058). 



971 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 

Bradbury, Principal Deputy Acting Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the 
War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

972 See Volume I for details on these discussions. 

973 September 6, 2006, The White House, President Discusses Creation of Military Commissions to Try Suspected 
Terrorists. 



TOP SECRET// 



flNOF O R N 



Page 159 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ / NOFORN 



significant inaccurate statements, especially regarding the significance of information acquired 
from CIA detainees and the effectiveness of the CIA’s interrogation techniques. 974 

(U) In the speech, the president announced the transfer of 14 detainees to Department of 
Defense custody at Guantanamo Bay and the submission to Congress of proposed legislation on 
military commissions. 975 As all other detainees in the CIA’s custody had been transferred to 
other nations, the CIA had no detainees in its custody at the time of the speech. 976 

2. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Gains Access to CIA Detainees 
After Their Transfer to U.S. Military Custody in September 2006 



After the 14 CIA detainees arrived at the U.S. military base at 
Guantanamo Bay, they were housed in a separate building from other U.S. military detainees and 
remained under the operational control of the CIA. 977 In October 2006, the 14 detainees were 
allowed meetings with the ICRC and described in detail similar stories regarding their detention, 
treatment, and interrogation while in CIA custody. The ICRC provided information on these 
claims to the CIA. 978 Acting CIA General Counsel John Rizzo emailed the CIA director and 
other CIA senior leaders, following a November 8, 2006, meeting with the ICRC, stating: 



“[a]s described to us, albeit in summary form, what the detainees allege 
actually does not sound that far removed from the reality. . . the ICRC, for its 
part, seems to find their stories largely credible, having put much stock in the 
fact that the story each detainee has told about his transfer, treatment and 
conditions of confinement was basically consistent, even though they had been 
incommunicado with each other throughout their detention by us.” 979 



In February 2007 the ICRC transmitted to the CIA its final report 
on the “Treatment of Fourteen ‘High Value Detainees’ in CIA Custody.” The ICRC report 
concluded that “the ICRC clearly considers that the allegations of the fourteen include 
descriptions of treatment and interrogation techniques - singly or in combination - that amounted 
to torture and/or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.” 980 Notwithstanding Rizzo’s comments, 
the CIA disagreed with a number of the ICRC’s findings, provided rebuttals to the ICRC in 



974 See Volume I and Volume II for additional infonnation. 

975 September 6, 2006, The White House, President Discusses Creation of Military Commissions to Try Suspected 
Terrorists. 

976 See Volume III for additional information. 

977 CIA Background Memo for CIA Director visit to Guantanamo, December I 2006, entitled Guantanamo Bay 
High-Value Detainee Detention Facility. 



978 Email from: 




-TC/LGL; to: John Rizzo, 

|, [REDACTED], [ REDACTED!, [REDACTED], 

~|; subject: 8 November 2006 Meeting with ICRC reps; date: 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: 

November 9, 2006, at 12:25 PM. 

^^mailfromjJohn A. Rizzo; to: Michael V. Hayden, Stephen R. Kappes, Michael J. Morell; cc: 
mmtmmmm* [REDACTED]; subject: Fw: 8 November 2006 Meeting with ICRC Reps; date: November 9, 
2006, at 12:25 PM. 

98 0 February 14, 2007, Letter to John Rizzo, Acting Ge neral Counsel, from 1 
|, International Committee of the Red Cross, 

// NOFORN 

Page 160 of 499 



TQP - SE G RET/, 




UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ / 



//NOFORN 



writing, and informed the Committee that “numerous false allegations of physical or threatened 
abuses and faulty legal assumptions and analysis in the report undermine its overall 
credibility.” 981 The ICRC report was acquired by The New York Review of Books and posted on 
the Review's website in April 2009. 982 The Committee found the ICRC report to be largely 
consistent with information contained in CIA interrogation records. 983 

3. The CIA Considers Future of the Program Following the Military Commissions Act 



c ) As noted, in June 2006, the U.S. Supreme Court case of Hamdan v. 
Rumsfeld prompted the OLC to withdraw a draft legal memorandum on the impact of the 
Detainee Treatment Act on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 984 The administration 
determined that the CIA would need new legislation to continue to use the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 985 The Military Commissions Act addressed the issues raised by the 
Hamdan decision and provided the president the authority to issue an Executive Order detailing 
permissible conduct under Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. The bill passed the 
Senate on September 28, 2006, and the House of Representatives the following day. 986 



On November |, 2006, when Abd Hadi al -Iraqi was rendered to 
CIA custody, the draft Executive Order and an updated OLC memorandum had not yet been 
prepared. 987 Although Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi was consistently assessed as being cooperative, 



981 CIA Comments on the February 2007 ICRC Report on the Treatment of Fourteen “High Value Detainees” in 
CIA Custody. At a Committee Hearing on April 12, 2007, CIA Director Hayden emphasized the close relationship 
the CIA had with the ICRC (“I believe ou r contacts with the ICRC have been very useful. I have met witlJH|| 

, the for the Red Cross, on several occasions at CIA. It appears that HBI 

is a runner and he’s promised to bring his gear with him next time he comes to Langley so that we can 
jog on the compound.”), but emphasized the errors in the ICRC report, stating: “While CIA appreciates the time, 
effort, and good intentions of the ICRC in forming its report, numerous false allegations of physical or threatened 
abuses and faulty legal assumptions and analysis in the report undermine its overall credibility.” ( See SSCI Hearing 
Transcript, dated April 12, 2007 (DTS# 2007-3158).) As is described in more detail in Volume II, Director 
Hayden’s statements to the Committee regarding the ICRC report included significant inaccurate information. 

982 See Assets/nybooks.com/media/doc/2010/04/022/icrc — report.pdf and detainee reviews and reports in Volume 
III. 




983 CIA officers in RDG and OMS prepared a number of documents disputing the ICRC allegations. See document 
entitled, “CIA Comments on the February 2007 ICRC Report on the Treatment of Fourteen ‘High Value Detainees’ 
in CIA Custody .” See Volumes 1 and III for additional i nformation. 

984 Gmail from: to: [REDACTED]; cc: John Rizzo; subject: FW: Summary 

of Hamdcm Decision; date: June 30, 2006, at 4:44 PM. 

985 Acting Assistant Attorney General Bradbury told the Department of Justice’s Office of Professional 
Responsibility (OPR) that officials from the Departments of State, Defense, and Justice met with the president and 
officials from the CIA and the NSC to consider the impact of the Hamdan decision, and that it was clear from the 
outset that legislation would have to be enacted to address the application of Common Article 3 and the War Crimes 
Act to the CIA interrogation program. As the OPR report noted, ‘ Hamdan directly contradicted OLC’s January 22, 
2002 opinion to the White House and the Department of Defense, which had concluded that Common Article 3 did 
not apply to captured members of al Qaeda.” See Department of Justice Office of Professional Responsibility ; 
Report, Investigation into the Office of Legal Counsel’s Memoranda Concerning Issues Relating to the Central 
Intelligence Agency’s Use of Enhanced Interrogation Techniques on Suspected Terrorists, July 29, 2009 (DTS 



#2010-1058). 

986 S. 3930 passed the Senate by a vote of 65-34 (Record Vote Number: 259) and the House by a vote of 250-170 
(Roll no. 508). It was signed into law on October 17, 2006. 



6361 

TOP SECRET/ 




7NOFQR N 



Page 161 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



fl NOFORN 



interrogators also believed he was withholding information on o perational plots and the locations 
of high-value targets. 988 The CIA believed his BUmHIH in February 2007 supported this 
conclusion, 989 prompting discussions at CIA Headquarters about the possible use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against him. By the end of the month, however, the CIA had 
determined there was “insufficient intelligence... that [Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi] possesses actionable 
information... to justify the use of’ the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 990 

I n October 2006, a panel of CIA interrogators recommended that 
four CIA enhanced interrogation techniques — the abdominal slap, cramped confinement, nudity, 
and the waterboard — be eliminated, but that the remainder of the interrogation techniques be 
retained. 991 Under this proposal, the CIA would have been authorized to subject detainees to 
dietary manipulation, sleep deprivation, the facial slap, the facial grasp, the attention grab, 
walling, stress positions, and water dousing. There are few CIA records describing the panel’s 
deliberations, or the CIA’s response to its recommendations. The panel proposed dropping two 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — nudity and the abdominal slap — that the CIA 
director had proposed retaining in March 2006, while recommending that the CIA retain three 
other techniques — walling, stress positions, and water dousing — that had not otherwise been 
requested for retention 992 

4. The CIA Develops Modified Enhanced Interrogation Program After Passage of the 
Military Commissions Act 



I n the spring of 2007, the OLC completed a draft of a legal opinion 
concluding that the use of the CIA’s seven proposed enhanced interrogation techniques — sleep 
deprivation, nudity, dietary manipulation, facial grasp, facial slap, abdominal slap, and the 
attention grab — would be consistent with the requirements of Common Article 3 of the Geneva 
Conventions and the Military Commissions Act. This draft generated significant disagreement 
between the State Department’s legal advisor, John Bellinger, and the Acting Assistant Attorney 
General Steven Bradbury, resulting in Secretary of State Rice refusing to concur with the 
proposed Executive Order. 993 




988 See, for example, 1335 (021946Z NOV 06); 

(041805Z NOV 06); 1370 (071318Z NOV 06); 

(271250Z NOV 06);^^^l 1703 (0409 18Z DEC 06); 
(Q 81606Z JA N 07); ^^Hl956 (15121 1Z JAN 07); “ 

989 2 065 (081633Z FE B 07) 

99 °Email from: HCTC/LGL; to: 

■M; subject: What needs to occur before we ask for EITs on 
07); date: February 9, 2007. 

991 See October 23, 2006, Memorandum for Director, CIA from 





1340 (041114Z NOV 06); 
1574 (2309 10Z NOV 06); 
1860 (181622Z DEC 06); 
2007 (251057Z JAN 07). 



[REDACTED], HI 
|; HEADQUARTERS (272015Z FEB 



I, Chief, 




^^Se^October 23, 2006, Memorandum for Director, CIA from Chief, 

IHICHM and DCIA Talking Points for 9 March 2006 Principals Committee Meeting. 

993 February 9, 2007, letter from John B. Bellinger III, Legal Adviser, Department of State, to Steven G. Bradbury, 
Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice. At the time, there were internal 
disagreements within the CIA about whether the CIA should have a detention and interrogation program. An April 
2007 Sametime communication between the chief of CTC and another se nior CIA leader describ ed these 
disagreements and how CIA leadership responded to them. According to “[REDACTED] 

was carping to [REDACTED] and Jose [Ro^iguezUas^rid^^^haUieand[Michael] Sulick (!) had a long talk 

TOP SECRE 

Page 162 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T// 



//N Q E O R N 



In June 2007, in an effort to gain Secretary Rice's support, the CIA 
asked CIA contractors SWIGERT and DUNBAR to brief Secretary Rice on the CIA’s 
interrogation program. During that briefing, Secretary Rice expressed her concern about the use 
of nudity and a detainee being shackled in the standing position for the purpose of sleep 
deprivation. According to CIA records, in early July 2007, after the capture of Muhammad 
Rahim, Secretary Rice indicated that she would not concur with an interrogation program that 
included nudity, but that she would not continue to object to the CIA’s proposed interrogation 
program if it was reduced to six of the enhanced interrogation techniques listed in the draft OLC 
memorandum: (1) sleep deprivation, (2) dietary manipulation, (3) facial grasp, (4) facial slap, 

(5) abdominal slap, and (6) the attention grab. 994 

5. Muhammad Rahim , the CIA ’s Last Detainee , is Subjected to Extensive Use of the CIA ’s 
Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, Provides No Intelligence 



(TSZ/llllflll^^^^l^^^NE) On June 25, 2007, al-Qa’ida facilitator Muhammad Rahim was 
captured in Pakistan. 995 Based on reports of debriefings of Rahim in foreign government custody 
and other intelligence, CIA personnel assessed that Rahim likely possessed information related 
to the location of Usama bin Laden and other al-Qa’ida leaders. 996 On July 3, 2007, Acting CIA 
General Counsel John Rizzo informed Acting Assistant Attorney General Steven Bradbury that 
the CIA was anticipating a “new guest,” and that the CIA “would need the signed DOJ opinion 
‘in a matter of days.’” 997 



(TS/^I^H^^^^^^/NE) Muhammad Rahim was rendered to CIA custody at DETENTION 
SITE BROWN in Country | on ^■■UHlu 1 )' H> 2007. 998 Upon his arrival, CIA 
interrogators had a single discussion with Rahim during which he declined to provide answers to 
questions about threats to the United States and the locations of top al-Qa’ida leaders. 999 Based 
on this interaction, CIA interrogators reported that Rahim was unlikely to be cooperative. As a 



and agree the CIA is off the track and rails... that we should not be doing detention, rendition, interrogation.” 
Referring to a CIA leaders hip meeting that day in which the Committee’s April 12, 2007, hearing would be 
discussed, HHHHi stated that: “I want to take that [criticism] on by letting all know how importan [sic] this 
[hearing] is... and what the leaderships [sic] position is from hayden, kappes and jose... in case there is some 
corrosive, bullshit mumbling and rumblings amongcomopenn - “compo^ of which i am 

seeing.” Sametime communication between and l2/Apr/07, 09:50:54 

to 09:56:57. 

994 Email from: to: Jose Rodriguez, John Rizzo etc.; subject: EIT briefing for SecState on 

June 22, 2007; datejJune22j2007; July 3, 2007, Steven Bradbury, Handwritten Notes, “John Rizzo”; email from: 
John A. Rizzo; to: HHHHB cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Conversation with Bradbury; date: 

July 3, 2007. 

1199 (251634Z JUN 07); 6439 7516 




996 CIA memorandum titled, CTC/RDG Planning for Possible Rendition of Mohammed Rahim - 19 June 2007. The 
document was unsigned, and the author is unknown. A subsequent version, with identical text, was titled CTC/RDG 
Planning for Possible Rendition of Mohammad Rahim - 25 June 2007. See also 2463 (201956Z JUL 07). 

HHfl: cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Conversation with 



997 Email from: John A. Rizzo; to: 
Br adbury; date: Ju ly 3, 2007. 

998 ^ j 6439 

999 ^^™2432 07) 

TOP -S ECRET// 




7516 



//NOEOR N 



Page 163 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



result, CIA Director Michael Hayden sent a letter to the president formally requesting that the 
president issue the Executive Order interpreting the Geneva Conventions in a manner to allow 
the CIA to interrogate Rahim using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. A classified 
legal opinion from OLC concluding that the use of the CIA’s six enhanced interrogation 
techniques proposed for use on Rahim (sleep deprivation, dietary manipulation, facial grasp, 
facial slap, abdominal slap, and the attention grab) did not violate applicable laws was issued on 
July 20, 2007. The accompanying unclassified Executive Order was issued the same day. 1000 
Although Rahim had been described by the CIA as “one of a handful of al-Qa’ida facilitators 
working directly for Bin Ladin and Zawahiri,” 1001 Rahim remained in a CIA cell without being 
questioned for a week, while CIA interrogators waited for approval to use the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against him. 1002 



CIA interrogators initially expressed optimism about their ability to 
acquire information from Rahim using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. A cable 
sent from the CIA detention site stated: 



“Senior interrogators on site, with experience in almost every HVD [high- 
value detainee] interrogation conducted by [CIA], believe the employment of 
interrogation with measures would likely provide the impetus to shock 
[Rahim] from his current resistance posture and provide an opportunity to 
influence his behavior to begin truthful participation.” 1003 

Four CIA interrogators present at the CIA detention site began 
applying the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on July 21, 2007. 1004 According to CIA 
records, the interrogators “employed interrogation measures of facial slap, abdominal slap, and 
facial hold, and explained to [Rahim] that his assumptions of how he would be treated were 
wrong.” 1005 The interrogators emphasized to Rahim that “his situation was the result of his 
deception, he would stay in this position until interrogators chose to remove him from it, and he 
could always correct a previous misstatement.” 1006 According to the cable describing the 
interrogation, Rahim then threatened to fabricate information: 

“[Rahim] reiterated several times during the session that he would make up 
information if interrogators pressured him, and that he was at the complete 



1 °°° j u jy 2007, letter from Michael Hayden, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, to President George W. 
Bush; Executive Order 13440, July 20, 2007; and Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Acting Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, 
July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the 
Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al 
Qaeda Detainees. 

1001 CIA memorandum titled, “CTC/RDG Planning for Possible Rendition of Mohammed Rahim - 19 June 2007.” 
The document was unsigned, and the author is unknown. A subsequent version, with identical text, was titled 
“CTC/RDG Planning for Possible Rendition of Mohammad Rahim - 25 June 2007.” 




2445 (181104Z JUL 07); 
2463 (201956Z JUL 07) 
2467 (21 1341Z JUL 07) 
2467 (211341Z JUL 07) 
2467 (21 1341Z JUL 07) 

TOP SECRET// 



1 2463 (201956Z JUL 07); 



2467 (21 1 341 Z JUL 07) 



//NOFORN 



Page 164 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET -// 



//NOFOR N 



mercy of the interrogators and they could even kill him if they wanted. 

Interrogators emphasized to [Rahim] that they would not allow him to die 
because then he could not give them information, but that he would, 
eventually, tell interrogators the truth.” 1007 

During the interrogation of Rahim using the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, Rahim was subjected to eight extensive sleep deprivation sessions, 1008 
as well as to the attention grasp, facial holds, abdominal slaps, and the facial slap. 1009 During 
sleep deprivation sessions, Rahim was usually shackled in a standing position, wearing a diaper 
and a pair of shorts. 1010 Rahim’s diet was almost entirely limited to water and liquid Ensure 
meals. 1011 CIA interrogators would provide Rahim with a cloth to further cover himself as an 
incentive to cooperate. For example, a July 27, 2007, cable from the CIA detention site states 
that when Rahim showed a willingness to engage in questioning about “historical information,” 
he was “provided a large towel to cover his torso” as a “subtle reward.” 1012 CIA interrogators 
asked Rahim a variety of questions during these interrogations, seeking information about the 
current location of senior al-Qa’ida leaders, which he did not provide. 1013 



1007 2467 (21 1341Z JUL 07) 

1008 Rahim was subjected to 104.5 hours of sleep deprivation from July 21, 2007, to July 25, 2007. Sleep 
deprivation was stopped when Rahim “described visual and auditory hallucinations.” After Rahim was allowed to 
sleep for eight hours and the psychologist concluded that Rahim had been faking his symptoms, Rahim was 
subjected to another 62 hours of sleep deprivation . A third, 13 hour session, was haltedduetoa limit of 180 hours 
of sl eep depriv ation during a 30 day periodfjSeej^H^H 2486 (251450Z JUL07)j^B(H 2491 (261237Z JUL 
07)j|M| 2496 (261834Z JUL 07); H|H|2501 (271624Z JUL 07); HBP502(281557Z JUL 07); and 
11^^1^508 (291820Z JUL 07).) On August 20, 2007, Rahim was subjected to a fourth sleep deprivation 
session. After a session that lasted 104 hours, CIA Headquarters consulted with the Department of Justice and 
determined that “[tjermination at this point is required to be consistent with the DCIA Guidelines, whichlimit sleep 
deprivation to an aggregate of 180 hours in any repeat any 30 day period.” (See HEADQUARTERS HH 
(240022Z AUG 07).) Between August 28, 2007, and September 2, 2007J*ahim was subjected to three additional 
sleep depr ivation sessions of 32.5 hours, 12 hours, and 12 hours. ( See |^U^^264^291552Z AUG 07); 

2661 (311810Z AUG 07); 2662 (010738Z SEP 07)Tand®BH| 2666 (020722Z SEP 07).) 



As described, CIA interrogators conducted an eighth sleep deprivation session, lasting 138.5 hours, in November 



2007. 

1009 I 



1 2467 (21 1 341 Z JUL 07_); 
|255 8 (08 151 1Z AUG 07); 

1 2496 (261 834Z JUL 07); 
2558 (08151 1Z AUG 07); 
2645 (291552Z AUG 07); 
2666 (030722Z SEP 07) 
2467 (211 341 Z JUL 07); 
2501 (271624Z JUL 07) 
2467 (211341Z JUL 07); 
2502 (281557Z JUL 07); 
2558 (08151 1Z AUG 07) 
2644 (281606Z AUG 07) 
2661 (311810Z AUG 07) 




2502 (281557Z JUL 07); 
2654 (301659Z AUG 07); 

2508 (291820Z JUL 07); 
2626 (241158Z AUG 07); 
2661 (31 181 0Z AUG 07); 



2570 (101 155Z AUG 07); 




1 2476 (231419Z JUL 07); | 

12508 (291 820Z JUL 07); | 

2570 (101 155Z AUG 07); 

2645 (291552Z AUG 07); 

2662 (020738Z SEP 07); \ 

1 2671 (061450Z SEP 07). CIA contractor DUNBAR participated in Muhammad Rahim’s interrogation 
sessions from August 9, 2007, to August 29, 2007. See Volume III for additional details. 

top 

Page 165 of 499 




2554 (071453Z AUG 07); 
2671 (061450Z SEP 07) 
2554 (071453Z AUG 07); 
2644 (281606Z AUG 07); 
2662 (02073 8Z SEP 07); 



2615 (201 528Z AUG 07) 



2496 (261834Z JUL 07); 
2554 (071453Z AUG 07); 
2626 (241 158Z AUG 07); 
2654 (301659Z AUG 07); 
2666 (030722Z SEP 07); 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



September 8, 2007, CIA Director Hayden approved an 
extension of Muhammad Rahim’s CIA detention. 1014 The Director of the National Clandestine 
Service Jose Rodriguez disagreed with the approved extension, writing: 



“I did not sign because I do not concur with extending Rahim’s detention for 
another 60 days. I do not believe the tools in our tool box will allow us to 
overcome Rahim’s resistance techniques. J.A.R.” 1015 

Shortly after the September 2007 extension, CIA personnel were 
directed to stop the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Rahim. Rahim was 
then left in his cell with minimal contact with CIA personnel for approximately six weeks. 1016 
On September 10, 2007, Rahim’s interrogators reported to CIA Headquarters that Rahim had 
“demonstrated that the physical corrective measures available to HVDIs 1017 have become 
predictable and bearable.” 1018 The use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Rahim 
resumed on November 2, 2007, with a sleep deprivation session that lasted until November 8, 
2007, for a total of 138.5 hours. This sleep deprivation session, the longest to which Rahim had 
been subjected, was his eighth and final session. Rahim was also subjected to dietary 
manipulation during this period. 1019 

According to CIA records, intermittent questioning of Rahim 
continued until December 9, 2007, when all questioning of Rahim ceased for nearly three weeks. 
During this time, CIA detention site personnel discussed and proposed new ways to encourage 
Rahim’s cooperation. These new proposals included suggestions that Rahim could be told that 
audiotapes of his interrogations might be passed to his family, or that 



1014 CIA memorandum from Director, Counterterrorism Center, to Director, Central 

Intelligence Agency, September 7, 2007, Subject: Request to Extend Detention of Muhammad Rahim. 

1015 CIA Routing and Record Sheet with Signatures for approval of the Memorandum, “Request to Extend Detention 
of Muhammad Rahim,” September 5, 2007. J.A.R. are the initia ls of the Director of th e NCS, Jose A. Rodriguez. 

1016 2697 (121 226Z SEP 07); CIA memorandum from Director, Counterterrorism 

Center, to Director, Central Intelligence Agency, October 31^2007, Subject: Request Approval for the use of 
Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; HEADQUARTERS |H| (101710 SEP 07). During this period, contractor 
Grayson SWIGERT recommended two approaches. The first was increasing Rahim’s amenities over 8-14 days 
“before returning to the use of EITs.” The second was “switching from an interrogation approach that in effect 
amounts to a ‘battle of wills,’ to a ‘recruiting’ approach that sidesteps the adversarial contest inherent in framing the 
session as an interrogation.” SWIGERT noted, however, that the latter approach “is apt to be slow in producing 
information” since intelligence requirements would not be immediately serviced, and “it would work best if [Rahim] 
believe^i^will be irHCIA^ustody indefinitely .’’ ( See email from: Grayson SWIGERT; to: [REDACTED] and 
■■H; cc: im and Hammond DUNBAR; subject: Some thoughts on [Rahim] interrogation 
next steps; date: September 17, 2007, at 4:05 PM.) The CTC’s deputy chief of operations replied that, “It’s clear 
that the ‘harsh’ approach isn’t going to work and the more we try variants on it, the more it allows [Rahim] to 
believe he has won^Th^mestion is whether that perceptionwillbeconveyed in Scenario 2.” See email from 
[REDACTED] to: ■■^^■jccHREDACTED], ■■■■■, Grayson SWIGERT, Hammond 
DUNBAR, [REDACTED]7||^||||^^^|, [REDACTED]; subject: Fw: Some thoughts on [Rahim] 
interrogation next steps; date: September 17, 2007, at 4:28 PM. 

10.7 Higl^alue Detainee Interrogators (HVDI) 

10.8 ■^■2691 (101 306Z SEP 07) 

10.9 llfll 2888 (022355Z NOV 07); 2915 (081755Z NOV 07). Due to the time zone difference, 

when this sleep deprivation session began it was November 2, 2007, at CIA Headquarters, but November 3, 2007, at 
the detention site. 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 166 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T// 



//NOFOR N 



Rahim was cooperating with U.S. forces. On December 
18, 2007, CIA Headquarters directed the detention site to stand down on the proposals. 1020 

(TS/V|^|^^H^/NF) The CIA’s detention and interrogation of Mohammad Rahim 
resulted in no disseminatedintelligenc^^orts. 1021 ^Oi^MarclJ||^008, Muhammad Rahim was 
(^■■bytheCIA to where took custod^H^ahim. 

The government immediately transferred Rahim to the custody of at 

which point Rahim was transferred back to CIA custody and rendered by the CIA to U.S. 
military custody at Guantanamo Bay. 1022 

6. CIA After-Action Review of Rahim Interrogation Calls for Study of Effectiveness of 

Interrogation Techniques and Recommends Greater Use of Rapport-Building Techniques 
in Future CIA Interrogations 

(TS//^^HIHIH//NF) On April 21, 2008, and April 22, 2008, the CIA’s RDG convened 
an after-action review of the CIA’s interrogation of Muhammad Rahim. According to summary 
documents, the CIA review panel attempted to determine why the CIA had been unsuccessful in 
acquiring useful information from Rahim. The summary documents emphasized that the 
primary factors that contributed to Rahim’s unresponsiveness were the interrogation team’s lack 
of knowledge of Rahim, the decision to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
immediately after the short “neutral probe” and subsequent isolation period, the lack of clarity 
about whether the non-coercive techniques described in the Army Field Manual were permitted, 
the team’s inability to confront Rahim with incriminating evidence, and the use of multiple 
improvised interrogation approaches despite the lack of any indication that these approaches 
might be effective. 1023 The summary documents recommended that future CIA interrogations 
should incorporate rapport-building techniques, social interaction, loss of predictability, and 
deception to a greater extent. 1024 The documents also recommended that the CIA conduct a 





3097 (1 41 32 1 Z DEC 07); 

3151 (291607Z DEC 07); 

3166 (011404Z JAN 08); HEADQUARTERS 
1021 See Volume II and Volume III for add itional informa tion. 

■■■■97541 



1022 3445 

■■8408 
his time in nominal 



3144 (270440Z DEC 07); 
3165 (311016Z DEC 07); 



(180120Z DEC 07) 




Records indicate that Rahim did not depart 
|custody. See Volume III for additional details on this transfer. 




[during 



1023 Undated CIA Memorandum, titled 



After-Action Review, author (REDACTED); Undated CIA 
Memorandum, titled [Rahim] After Action Review: HVDI Assessment, with attached addendum, [Rahim] Lessons 
Learned Review Panel Recommendations Concerning the Modification of Sleep Deprivation and Reinstatement of 
Walli ng as an E1T, and Memorandum from 
MB to Director, CTC, May 9, 2008, Subject: Results of After-Action Review of [Rahim] Interrogation. A 
document drafted by one of the participants prior to the review suggested that “intense legal/policy scrutiny” was 
also a negative factor; however, this point was not mentioned in any of the post-review summaries, except in the 
context of discussing confusion over whether particular interrogation methods were legal. The summary documents 
state that CIA officers devised and implemented several different strategies, one after another. According to one of 
the documents, “[t]hese varied strategies were implemented due to frustration and concern regarding the lack of 
intelligence production.” 

1024 Undated CIA Memorandum, titled After-Action Review, author (REDACTED), Undated CIA 

Memorandum, titled [Rahim] After Action Review: HVDI Assessment, with attached addendum, [Rahim] Lessons 
Learned Review Panel Recommendations Concerning the Modification of Sleep Deprivation and Reinstatement of 

mu 1 i ( ii i i 1 mi iii m 

Page 167 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



survey of interrogation techniques used by other U.S. government agencies and other countries 
in an effort to develop effective interrogation methods. 1025 

Muhammad Rahim was the last CIA detainee in the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. 1026 

7. CIA Contracting Expenses Related to Company Formed by SWIGERT and DUNBAR 

CIA contractors SWIGERT and DUNBAR, who played a central 
role in the development of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in the su mmer of 2002, 
and then used the techniques as contract interrogators, formed a company in 2005 | 

| “Company Y’’J. 1027 In addition to providing interrogators for the CIA’s interrogation program, 
Company Y was granted a sole source contract to provide operational psychologists, debriefers, 
and security personnel at CIA detention sites. 1028 Under the contract, Company Y was tasked 
with conducting ongoing conversations with CIA detainees to learn about the terrorist mind set 
(this project was named the “Terrorist Think Tank” or “T 3 ”), developing 
strategies, and writing the history of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 1029 Later 
descriptions of their services note that — on behalf of the CIA — Company Y officers participated 
in the interrogations of detainees held in foreign government custody and served as 
intermediaries between entities of those governments and the CIA. 1030 

By 2006, the value of the base contract for their company, with all 
options exercised, was in excess of $180 million. 1031 As of May 2007, Company Y had hired | 
former CIA staff officers, many of whom had previously been involved with the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. Company Y’s chief operating officer was the former 




Walli ng as an LIT, and Memorandum from | 

I to Director, CTC, May 9, 2008. Subject: Re sults of After- Action Review of [Rahim] Interrogation. 
1025 Undated CIA Memorandum, titled I 



| After-Action Review, author (REDACTED), Undated CIA 
Memorandum, titled | Rahim] After Action Review: HVDl Assessment, with attached addendum, [Rahim] Lessons 
Learned Review Panel Recommendations Concerning the Modification of Sleep Deprivation and Reinstatement of 
Walling as an EIT. 

1026 See Volume III for additional information. 

1027 For more information on CIA contracting with [Company Y ], see Volume I. 

1028 Letter to I 



[Company Y|, attn: Hammond DUNBAR from | REDACTED], 
Contracting Officer, re Confirmation of Verbal Authorization to Proceed Not to Exceed (ATP/NTE); email from: 



[REDACTED!; to: 



|;cc: [REDACTED!, [REDACTED], 



| REDACTED!; 



subject: Next Contractual Steps with SWIGERT& DUNBAR; date: March 2, 2005; March 18, 2005, Letter from 



[REDACTED!, Chief, to 
1029 Email from: 

AM; email from 




[ Com pany Y | , re Lette r Contract 

I; date: June 17, 2005, at 1 1 :08:22 



!; subject: 

; to: [REDACTED), [REDACTED], [REDACTED!; cc: 

HHHH- [REDACTED), [REDACTED!, [REDACTED]; subject: PCS CTC officer to [Company Y 

location] (“One of the primary functions is to develop and set-up what we call the T errorist Think Tank* 

(previously briefed to the DDO and ADDO) which will be critical as we develop our 

date: July 12, 2005. at 10:25:48 AM; Justification Date: 28 February 2006, Justification For Other Than Full And 
Open Competition, Contractor: [Company YJ. 

1020 See, for example, [Company Y] Monthly report, February 2006; [Company Y] Monthly Report, March 2006; 
[Company Y] Quarterly, 01 Jan - 31 March 2007. 

1031 Justification Date: 25 July 2006, Justification For Other Than Full and Open Competition, Contractor: 
[Company Y|. 



TOP SECRET// 



# NOFORN 



Page 1 68 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



U NOFORN 



chief of the division of the CIA supervising the Renditions and 

Detention Group. In addition, Company Y hired at least | CIA security protective officers to 
work on Company Y’s CIA contracts. In March 2006, a list of projected staff and contracto rs 
within CI A’s R enditions and Detention Group included separate positions. 1032 Of those Hi 
positions, || [73%] were for contractors, the majority of whom were cont ractors from 
Company Y. 1033 By June 2007, RDG rcportedhaving | staff officers and 
contractors. 1034 By 2008, RDG had a total of m positions, with | staff officersandBI |.85%] 
contractors, according to the CIA. 1035 



The CIA’s contract with Company Y was terminated in mid-2009. 
From the time of the company’s creation in 2005 through the close-out of its contract in 2010, 
the CIA paid Company Y more than $75 million for services in conjunction with the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrog ation Program. 1036 The CIA also certified Company Y’s office in 

I, as a Se cure Com partmented Information Facility (SCIF), which required 
a CIA officer to be detailed to | and provided Company Y access to CIA internal 
computer networks at its facility. In 2008, the CIA authorized an additional payment to 
Company Y of approximately $570,000, after CompanyYindicatedth^ for 

conducting countersurveillancc of its officers when HHHHHBHHMHHHHHHI 
appeared in the press in conjunction with the program. The CIA agreed to a $5 million 
indemnification contract for the company that covered, among other expenses, criminal 



prosecution. 1037 Company Y hired a prominent 



law firm for representation in 



2007, 1038 and billed the CIA $1.1 million for legal expenses from 2007 through 2012 per its 
indemnification agreement. 1039 Part of these expenses included legal representation at a 
Committee staff briefing by SWIGERT and DUNBAR on November |, 2008. 1040 Under the 
CIA’s indemnification contract, the CIA is obligated to pay Company Y’s legal expenses 
through 2021. 1041 



1032 do/CTC^/RDG Projected Staff & Contractors, updated as of March 15, 2006. 
i°33 DO/CTc|HfRDG Projected Staff & Contractors, updated as of March 15, 2006. 

1034 June 4, 2007, RDG, Mission Summary. 

i°35 ctc confirmation, received by telephone on November 16, 2012. 

1036 DTS #2009-1258; DTS #2012-4008. CIA paid Company Y $612,000 in 2010 for contract close-out costs. In a 
March 2009 notification, the CIA also informed the Committee that, in addition to payments to Company Y, 
Grayson SWIGERT and Hammond DUNBAR had received $1.5 million and $1.1 million, respectively, as 
individuals. As noted elsewhere, the notification includes inaccurate representations about the effectiveness of the 
CIA program. See Congressional Notification, March 18, 2009 (DTS #2009-1258). 

1037 Email from: [REDACTED], CTC^M; to: Hammond DUNBAR, Grayson SWIGERT; cc: 



[REDACTED], | 



I, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Copy of 



Signed Indemnification Agreement; date: July 13, 2007, at 02:22 PM; email from: [REDACTED], Chief, Contract 

|; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Fw: Modified Indemnification Agmt ... New AR 7-17 Waiver Memo, 
Too?; date: November 13, 2007, at 10:32 AM. 



I; subject: 



| Billing, May-December 2007; date: 



1038 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

August 12, 2008, at 06:42 PM. 

,039 Response from the CIA regarding Contract Costs for [Company Y], October 15, 2012 (DTS #2012-4008). 

1040 See DTS #2009-0572. 

1041 Response from the CIA regarding Contrac^ost^oGCompan^Y]^ctober 15, 2012 (DTS #2012-4008). 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi mu i 

Page 169 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



8. The CIA 's Detention and Interrogation Program Ends 



(U) On December 5, 2007, fewer than nine months after Director Hayden told the European 
Union that the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program was not a CIA program, but 
“America’s program,” the House-Senate conference for the Fiscal Year 2008 Intelligence 
Authorization Act voted to include an amendment that banned coercive interrogation techniques 
and established the Army Field Manual on Human Intelligence Collector Operations as the 
interrogation standard for all U.S. government interrogations. 1042 The conference report passed 
both the House and the Senate with bipartisan majorities. 1043 

(U) On March 8, 2008, President Bush vetoed the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2008 that banned coercive interrogations. In a radio address explaining the decision, the 
president stated “[t]he bill Congress sent me would take away one of the most valuable tools in 
the war on terror — the CIA program to detain and question key terrorist leaders and operatives.” 
Addressing the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, President Bush stated that 
the “main reason” the CIA program “has been effective is that it allows the CIA to use 
specialized interrogation procedures to question a small number of the most dangerous terrorists 
under careful supervision.” The president stated that the CIA program had a “proven track 
record,” and that the CIA obtained “critical intelligence” as a result of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques related to the Camp Lemonier plotting, the Karachi plotting, the Second 
Wave plotting, and the Heathrow Airport plotting. The president then repeated a warning the 
CIA had previously provided to the White House, that to “restrict the CIA to [interrogation] 
methods in the [Army] Field Manual,” “could cost American lives.” 1044 As is described in this 
summary, and detailed more extensively in the full Committee Study, the CIA’s representations 
to the White House regarding the role of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in the 
thwarting of the referenced plots were inaccurate. 



(U) On March 11, 2008, by a vote of 225-188, the House of Representatives failed to override 
the presidential veto. 1045 



In December 2008 and January 2009, CIA officers briefed the 
transition team for President-elect Barack Obama on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program. CIA Director Hayden prepared a statement that relayed, “despite what you have heard 
or read in a variety of public fora, these [enhanced interrogation] techniques and this program did 



i°42 DIRECTOR ■■ (152227Z MAR 07); House Report 1 10-478 - Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2008, 110 th Congress (2007-2008), Section 327. 

1043 H.R. 2082 passed the House of Representatives on December 13, 2007, by a vote of 222-197 (Roll No: 1 160) 
and passed the Senate on February 13, 2008, by a vote of 51-45 (Record Vote Number: 22). 

1044 See “Text: Bush on Veto of Intelligence Bill,” The New York Times, dated March 8, 2008. Located, among 
other places, at www.nytimes.com/2008/03/08/washington/08cnd-ptext.html. For an example of a previous CIA 
briefing to the White House with similar assertions, see CIA Memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation 
Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; with briefing 
slides entitled, “C/A Interrogation Program, ” dated July 29, 2003. The CIA document provided to the participants 
states, “Termination of this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” For additional commentary, see 
“Veto of Bill on CIA Tactics Affirms Bush’s Legacy,” The New York Times, dated March 9, 2008. 

1045 U.S. House of Representatives Roll Call Vote 1 17 of the 1 10 lh Congress, Second Session, March 11, 2008, 7:01 
PM. 



TOP SECRET// 



//N OFORN 



Page 170 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 




work.” 1046 The prepared materials included inaccurate information on the operation and 
management of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, as well as the same set of 
examples of the “effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques that the CIA had 
provided to policymakers over several years. 1047 The examples provided were nearly entirely 
inaccurate. 



) On January 22, 2009, President Obama issued Executive Order 
13491, which required the CIA to “close as expeditiously as possible any detention facilities that 
it currently operates and... not operate any such detention facility in the future.” The Executive 



Order prohibited any U.S. government employee from using interrogation techniques other than 
those in the Army Field Manual 2-22.3 on Human Intelligence Collector Operations. 1048 



1046 CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team - “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations (RDI)” including 
“Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009.” Referenced materials attached to cover 
memorandum with the title, “D/CIA Conference Room Seating Visit by President-elect Barrack [sic] Obama 
National Security Team Tuesday, 1 3 January 2009; 8:30 — 11 :30 a.m.” The briefing book includes the previously 
mentioned, “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting,” dated 15 May 2006, which provided the same 
intelligence claims found in the document of the same name, but dated April 15, 2005. 

1047 For detailed information, see Volume II. 

1048 The Executive Order also stated that the FBI and “other Federal law enforcement agencies” could “continu[e] to 
use authorized, non-coercive techniques of interrogation that are designed to elicit voluntary statements and do not 
involve the use of f orce, threats, or promises.” (See Executive Order 13491, “EnsuringJ : jiwfulJnte^ 

22, 2009.) 




Page 171 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



III. Intelligence Acquired and CIA Representations on the Effectiveness of 
the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques to Multiple 
Constituencies 

A. Background on CIA Effectiveness Representations 



From 2002 through 2009, in order to obtain policy authorizations 
and legal approvals, the CIA made a series of representations to officials at the White House, 1049 
the Department of Justice, and the Congress, asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques were uniquely effective and necessary to produce otherwise unavailable intelligence 
that the U.S. government could not obtain from other sources. 1050 The CIA further represented 



1049 These representations were also made by the CIA to other elements of the executive branch, to include the 
Office of the Director of National Intelligence. As described in this Study, the Department of Justice first approved 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on August 1, 2002. 

1050 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see : 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 
“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” {See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” {See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and which warned policymakers that 
“[t]ermination of this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” {See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for 
the Record from Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA 
Interrogation Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member 
Briefing; and September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) 
(4) The CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received. .. as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abr oad. The evidence points clearly to 

TOP SECRE T//B|^^^MU||^mp/ NOFORN 

Page 172 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques “saved lives” and “enabled the CIA to disrupt 
terrorist plots, capture additional terrorists, and collect a high volume of critical intelligence on 
al-Qa’ida.” 1051 The Department of Justice used these representations of effectiveness to assess 

the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” ( See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-1G; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for 
CIA Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and 
the [enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, 
of the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by 
other means.” {See CI A briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR]” (DTS #2009-1258), which provides a list of “some of the 
key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, and states: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this 
program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See Volume II for additional CIA 
representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the CIA to obtain unique, 
otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

las! A mon g other documents that contain the exact, or similar CIA representations, see: (1) CIA memorandum for 
the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, 
dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program, ” dated July 29, 2003, presented to 
senior White House officials with additional briefings using the slides as documented in September 4, 2003, CIA 
Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record 
from Scott Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program. (2) CIA memorandum to the CIA Inspector General from 
James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, dated February 27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to 
Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program’ (2003-7123-IG),” Attachment, 
“Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities,” dated February 24, 2004. (3) CIA 
Directorate of Intelligence, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent Source on Al-Qa’ida,” dated July 13^004; 
fax to the Department of Justice, April 22, 2005, entitled, “H, Materials on KSM and Abu Zubaydah. H ” This 
report was widely disseminated in the Intelligence Community and a copy of this report was provided to the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence on July 15, 2004. On March 31, 2009, former Vice President Cheney requested 
the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which was publicly released with redactions on August 24, 

2009. (4) CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intel ligence/^ubiect: 
“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist IntetrogationTech^ included in email from:ffmmiH; to: 

and subject: on 

techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. The email references the attached “information paper to Dr. 
Rice explaining the value of the interrogation techniques.” (5) C IA Memorandum fo^teve Bradbury at Office of 
Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from |^| Legal Group, DC1 

Counterterrorist Center, subject: “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” (6) CIA 
briefing for Vice President Cheney, dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA 
Detention and Interrogation Program.” (7) CIA Talking Points entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DCI 
Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques.” (8) CIA “Briefing 
Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” faxed from the CIA to the DepartmenU)Oustice on April 15, 2005, at 
10:47AM. (9) CIA fax to DOJ Command Cente^date^Apri^2, 2005, for Office of Legal 

Coun sel, U.S. Department of Justice, from Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, re: 

Materials of KSM and Abu Zubaydah, included CIA Intelligence Assessment “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: 
Preeminent Source on Al-Qa’ida,” and CIA document, “Materials of KSM and Abu Zubaydah.; (10) CIA 
Intelligence Assessment, “Detainee Reporting Pivotal for the War Against Al-Qa’ida,” June 2005, which CIA 



Page 173 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NQF Q RN 



whether the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were legal; 1052 policymakers at the White 
House used these representations — and the legal analysis by the Department of Justice — to 



records indicate was provided to White House officials on June 1, 2005. The Intelligence Assessment at the 
SECRET//NOFORN classification level was more broadly disseminated on June 3, 2005. On March 31, 2009, 
former Vice President Cheney requested the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which was publicly 
released with redactions on August 24, 2009. (11) CIA memorandum entitled, “Future of CIA’s Counterterrorist 
Detention and Interrogation Program,” dated December 23, 2005, from CIA Director Porter Goss to Stephen J. 
Hadley, Assistant to the President/National Security Advisor, Frances F. Townsend, Assistant to the 
President/Homeland Security Advisor, and Ambassador John D. Negroponte, the Director of National Intelligence, 
Attachment, “Impact of the Loss of the Detainee Program to CT Operations and Analysis.” (12) CIA briefing 
document dated May 2, 2006, entitled, “BRIEFING FOR CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE PRESIDENT 2 May 2006 
Briefing for Chief of Staff to the President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Programs.” 

(13) CIA briefing document entitled, “Detainee Intelligence Value Update,” dated 1 1 July 2006, internal document 
saved within CIA records as, “DNI Memo Intel Value July 11 2006... TALKING POINTS FOR DCI MEETING.” 

(14) CIA document dated July 16, 2006, entitled, “DRAFT Potential Public Briefing of CIA’s High-Value Terrorist 
Interrogations Program,” and “CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy,” drafts supporting the September 6, 

2006, speech by President George W. Bush acknowledging and describing the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 

Program, as well as an unclassified Office of the Director of National Intelligence release, entitled, “Summary of the 
High Value Terrorist Detainee Program.” (15) CIA classified statement for the record, Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence, provided by General Michael V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007, and 
accompanying Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing transcript, entitled, “Hearing on Central Intelligence 
Agency Detention and Interrogation Program.” (16) CIA fax from CIA employee [REDACTED] to U.S. Senate 
Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense, with fax cover shee t entitled, “Talking points,” sent on 
October 26, 2007, at 5:39:48PM, entitled, “Talking Points Appeal of the Million reduction in CIA/CTC’s 

Rendition and Detention Program.” (17) “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 
6, 2007, with the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” (18) CIA 
Briefing for Obama National Security Team- “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations (RDI)” including “Tab 7,” 
named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009,” prepared “13 January 2009.” (19) CIA briefing 
documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 18FEB.2009” and graphic 
attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM).” 
The documents include “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and Effectiveness,” with 
associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” “Background on Key 
Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background on Key Captures and 
Plots Disrupted.” (20) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on March 18, 2009, at 
3:46PM, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR]” (DTS #2009-1258). See also CIA representations detailed in 
OLC memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven 
G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application 
of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees; and OLC memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting 
General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment 
Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the 
Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

1052 See section of this summary addressing representations to the Department of Justice, as well as Memorandum 
for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant Attorney General, 
Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative; Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, 
Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations Under 
Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of High 
Value Al Qaeda Detainees; and Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence 
Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 

2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva 
Conventions to Certain Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda 
Detainees. 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 174 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 




assess whether the CIA interrogation program should be approved as a matter of policy; 1053 and 
members of Congress relied on the CIA representations in overseeing and assessing the program, 
providing funding, and crafting related legislation. 1054 



1053 Among other documents, see the August 5, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record from Scott Muller from a 
July 29, 2003, National Security Council Principals Meeting with the subject, “Review of Interrogation Program on 
29 July 2003,” as well as the accompanying briefing slides, “CIA Interrogation Program, July 29, 2003”; March 4, 

2005, Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program. CIA document, dated March 
4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program”; CIA document, 
dated May 2, 2006, entitled, BRIEFING FOR CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE PRESIDENT 2 May 2006 Briefing for 
Chief of Staff to the President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Programs; CIA document 
entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, with the notation the 
document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting”; and CIA Briefing for Obama National 
Security Team- “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations (RDI)” including “Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing 
on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009,” prepared “13 January 2009.” 

1054 Among other documents, see: (1) CIA testimony to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) on April 
24, 2002, regarding Abu Zubaydah’s initial interrogation; (2) CIA written answers to Committee Questions for the 
Record, dated August 15, 2002, regarding results of Abu Zubaydah’s interrogations; (3) CIA testimony to SSCI on 
September 5, 2002, regarding covert detention facilities and results of Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation; (4) CIA cable 
documenting September 27, 2002, briefing to Chairman Bob Graham and Vice Chairman Richard Shelby and their 
staff directors regarding the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in the interrogations of Abu Zubaydah; (5) 
CIA Memorandum for the Record documenting February 4, 2003, briefing to SSCI Chairman Pat Roberts and 
Committee staff directors regarding the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program; (6) CIA testimony to SSCI on 
March 5, 2003, regarding the capture and initial interrogation of KSM; (7) CIA witness testimony to SSCI on 
March 19, 2003, regarding KSM’s interrogation; (8) CIA witness testimony to SSCI on April 1, 2003, regarding 
KSM’s capture; (9) April 3, 2003, Intelligence Community Terrorist Threat Assessment regarding KSM threat 
reporting, entitled “Klialid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting — Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard 
of Lies,” provided to the SSCI on April 7, 2003; (10) CIA testimony to SSCI on April 30, 2003, regarding detainee 
reporting; (1 1) CIA testimony to SSCI on June 25, 2003, regarding KSM interrogation; (12) CIA testimony to 
SSCI on July 30^003jjeearding CIA detainee threat reporting; (13) CIA testimony to SSCI on September 3, 

2003, regarding authorities, including CIA detention authorities; (14) CIA prepared briefing for 

Chairman Pat Roberts and Vice Chairman John D. Rockefeller IV entitled, “CIA Interrogation Program: DDO 
Talking Points, 04 September 2003”; (15) CIA witness testimony to SSCI on May 12, 2004, regarding CIA role in 
abuses at Abu Ghraib prison; (16) SSCI staff notes for July 15, 2004, CIA briefing to Chairman Pat Roberts and 
Vice Chairman John D. Rockefeller IV regarding the status of the CIA interrogation program; (17) CIA testimony 
to SSCI on September 13, 2004, regarding CIA and the abuses at Abu Ghraib prison; (18) Hand-written notes of 
Vice Chairman John D. Rockefeller IV recording a briefing by Jose Rodriguez on March 7, 2005; (19) CIA 
Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Sensitive Issue -Counterterrorism, October 31, 2005, regarding briefing for 
Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist r egarding the Detainee Treatment Act, and email exchanges between John Rizzo, 

subject: “Re: Immediate Re: Sen. Frist required for briefing on impact of 
McCain Amendment”; date: October 31, 2005, and associated records concerning CIA briefings for Senators John 
McCain, Thad Cochran, Ted Stevens, and John Cornyn; (20) SSCI Memorandum for die Record, March 8, 2006, 
documenting CIA briefing of March 7, 2006, to staff on status of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program; 
(21) CIA Director Porter Goss testimony to the SSCI on March 15, 2006, regarding the status of the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program; (22) CIA Director Michael Hayden testimony to the SSCI on September 6, 

2006, regarding the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, prior to Senate consideration of the Military 
Commissions Act of 2006; (23) CIA Director Michael Hayden testimony to the SSCI on November 16, 2006, 



regarding the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, following passage of the Military Commissions Act of 
2006; (24) CIA Director Michael Hayden testimony to the SSCI on April 12, 2007, regarding the CIA’s Detention 
and Interrogation Program and a report of the International Committee of the Red Cross; (25) CIA fax from CIA 
employee [REDACTED] to U.S. Senate Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense, with fax cover 
sheet entitled, “Talking points,” sent on October 26, 2007, at 5:39:48 PM. Document faxed entitled, “Talking Points 
Appeal of the $HI Million reduction in CIA/CTC’s Rendition and Detention Program”; (26) CIA Director 



Michael Hayden testimony to the SSCI on 



December 11, 2007, regarding the public 



revelation of the CIA’s 



Page 175 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



I n CIA presentations to the executive and legislative branches, the 
CIA represented that other parties had consented to, or endorsed, the CIA’s interrogation 
program. As an example, during a policy review of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
in July 2003, the CIA informed a subset of the National Security Council principals that the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “approved by the attorney general,” and was 
“fully disclosed to the SSCI and HPSCI leadership.” In the same presentation, the CIA 
represented that the CIA interrogation program “had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives.” The CIA then provided 
examples of “attacks averted” as a direct result of the CIA interrogation program, and warned 
policymakers that “[germination of this program will result in loss of life, possibly 
extensive.” 1055 

When the CIA was asked by White House officials to review and 
provide further evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in 
2004, the CIA responded that it was “difficult, if not impossible” to conduct such a review, but 
assured White House officials that “this program works,” “the techniques are effective,” and the 
program produces “results.” 1056 The “results” provided by the CIA consisted of the “disruption” 
of specific terrorist plots and the capture of specific terrorists. The CIA further represented that 
the information acquired as a result of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was unique 
and “otherwise unavailable.” 1057 These specific CIA claims played an especially important role 



destruction of videotapes of the interrogations of Abu Zubaydah and ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri; (27) CIA Director 
Michael Hayden public testimony to the SSCI on February 5, 2008, regarding waterboarding and CIA 
interrogations, prior to Senate vote on February 13, 2008, on the Fiscal Year 2008 Intelligence Authorization Act 
that would have prohibited any member of the U.S. Intelligence Community from using interrogation techniques not 
authorized by the U.S. Army Field Manual. 

1055 Memorandum for the Record: “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003.” Memorandum prepared by 
CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003, and briefing slides entitled, “C/A Interrogation 
Program, ” dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. Those attending the meeting included 
the director of the CIA, George Tenet; the CIA general counsel, Scott Muller; Vice President Cheney; National 
Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice; White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales; Attorney General John Ashcroft; 
Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Patrick Philbin; and counsel to the National Security 
Council, John Bellinger. 

1056 CIA talking points for the National Security Council entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DCI Meeting 
PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques,” dated March 4, 2005, for a March 
8, 2005, meeting. See also CIA Memorandum for National Security Advisor Rice entitled, “Effectiveness of the 
CIA CounterteiTorist Interrogation Techniques,” dated December 2004. 

1057 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see : 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 
“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” (See Memorandum for John A. Ri zzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 

TOP 

Page 176 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




in the Department of Justice’s legal review of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1058 
Department of Justice documents stated that an analysis of the legality of the CIA’s enhanced 

Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve tills paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” (See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003, 
which represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant 
intelligence information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and which warned policymakers 
that “[germination of this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” ( See August 5, 2003 Memorandum 
for the Record from Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA 
Interrogation Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member 
Briefing; and September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) 
(4) The CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” (See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” (See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykli Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR]” (DTS #2009-1258), which provides a list of “some of the 
key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, and states: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this 
program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See Volume II for additional CIA 
representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the CIA to obtain unique, 
otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1058 See Volume II for detailed information. The OLC’s May 30, 2005, memorandum relied on the CIA’s 
representations in determining that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques did not violate the Fifth 
Amendment’s prohibition on executive conduct that “shocks the conscience,” indicating that this analysis was a 
“highly context-specific and fact-dependent question.” The OLC also linked its analysis of whether the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “constitutionally arbitrary” to the representation by the CIA that the 
program produced “substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence.” (See Memorandum for 
John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal 
Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States 




Page 177 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NOFORN 



interrogation techniques was a “highly context-specific, fact-dependent question” and 
highlighted the importance of the CIA representation that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques produced “substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence,” 
and were “largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United States.” 1059 

B. Past Efforts to Review the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques 



During the period in which the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program was operational, from 2002 to 2009, there were three reviews that addressed the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques: (1) the CIA Office of Inspector 
General Special Review, released in May 2004; (2) an internal review conducted by two senior 
CIA officers in 2004; and (3) a 2005 “Blue Ribbon” panel consisting of two individuals not 
employed by the CIA. According to CIA records, as of the spring of 2007, the CIA had not 
“conducted any other studies on the effectiveness of interrogation techniques.” 1060 



Each of the previous reviews relied on interviews with CIA 
personnel involved in the program, as well as documents prepared by CIA personnel, which 
represented that the CIA interrogation program was effective, and that the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques had “enabled the CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture 



Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the 
Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees.) The CIA provided examples of the purported effectiveness of the 
CIA’senhanced interroeationtechi^ues in response to a request from the OLC. According to an email horn | 
jjKHIHCTC Legal Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Steven Bradbury explained that 

“because the standards under Article 16 [of the Convention Against Torture] require a balancing of the 
government’s need for the information, it would be quite helpful if we had any ca se studies or exam ple s to 
demonstrate the value of information 



See email from: 



cc: 



to: 

I, [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; date: March 2, 2005, 2:32 PM. 

1059 Among other documents, see Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel memoranda dated May 30, 2005, 
and July 20, 2007. The May 30, 2005, OLC memorandum repeats additional CIA representations, including that 
“enhanced interrogation techniques remain essential to obtaining vital intelligence necessary to detect and disrupt 
such emerging threats” and that the use of the techniques “led to specific, actionable intelligence.” The July 20, 
2007, OLC memorandum states that the “...use of enhanced interrogation techniques is intended to service this 
paramount interest [security of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable 
intelligence,” citing CIA representations to the President that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques produced 
information “we could not get anywhere else,” and that “the use of such techniques saved American lives by 
revealing information about planned terrorist plots.” 

1060 See CIA draft response to Questions for the Record submitted by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
after an April 12, 2007, hearing on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. The CIA draft response states 
the CIA Blue Ribbon Panel, consisting of two outside reviewers, was the only independent review of the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and that “CIA had not conducted any other studies on 
the effectiveness of [the] interrogation techniques.” The final CIA response to the Committee states: “The 2004 
CIA Office of the Inspector General report that reviewed CIA’s counterterrorism detention and interrogation 
activities recommended a non-CIA independent experts’ review of the effectiveness of each of the authorized EIT 
and a determination regarding the necessity for the continued use of each technique. As a result, CIA sought and 



obtained the agreement of Mr. 



| to conduct an independent review, which is 



and Mr. 

also known as the Blue-Ribbon Panel repo rt. Their indivi dual repo rts are provid ed at Tabs A and B.” 

1 1 ii 1 1 ii 1 1 

Page 178 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ / 



flNOFQRN 



additional terrorists, and collect a high-volume of critical intelligence on al-Qa’ida.” 1061 CIA 
personnel represented: “[t]his is information that CTC could not have gotten any other way.” 1062 



There are no indications in CIA records that any of the past 
reviews attempted to independently validate the intelligence claims related to the CIA’s use of its 
enhanced interrogation techniques that were presented by CIA personnel in interviews and in 
documents. As such, no previous review confirmed whether the specific intelligence cited by the 
CIA was acquired from a CIA detainee during or after being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, or if the intelligence acquired was otherwise unknown to the United 
States government (“otherwise unavailable”), and therefore uniquely valuable. 



C. The Origins of CIA Representations Regarding the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques As Having “Saved Lives,” “Thwarted Plots,” and “Captured 
Terrorists” 



Before the CIA took custody of its first detainee, CIA attorneys 
researched the limits of coercive interrogations and the legal definitions of torture. On 
November 26, 2001, CIA Office of General Counsel (OGC) attorneys circulated a draft legal 
memorandum entitled “Hostile Interrogations: Legal Considerations for CIA Officers.” 1063 The 
memorandum listed interrogation techniques considered to be torture by a foreign government 
and a specific nongovernmental organization, including “cold torture,” “forced positions,” 
“enforced physical exhaustion,” “sensory deprivation,” “perceptual deprivation,” “social 
deprivation,” “threats and humiliation,” “conditioning techniques,” and “deprivation of 
sleep.” 1064 The draft memorandum described various prohibitions on torture and the potential 
use of “necessity” as a legal defense against charges of torture, stating: 

“[i]t would, therefore, be a novel application of the necessity defense to avoid 
prosecution of U.S. officials who tortured to obtain information that saved 
many lives . . . A policy decision must be made with regard to U.S. use of 
torture in light of our obligations under international law, with consideration 
given to the circumstances and to international opinion on our current 



1061 See\ (1) CIA Office of Inspector General, Special Review - Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program, (2003 -7 1 23 -IG), May 2004; (2) May 12, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from 

Chief, Information Operations Center, and Henry Crumpton, Chief, National Resources Divisions 
via Associate Deputy Director for Operations, with the subject line, “Operational Review of CIA Detainee 
Program’’; and (3) Blue Ribbon Panel Review, including a September 2, 2005, Memorandum from m| 

to Directo r Porter Goss , CIA, entitled “Assessment of EITs Effectiveness,” and a September 23, 2005, 
Memorandum from HHH to the Honorable Porter Goss, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, entitled, 
“Response to request from Director for Assessment of EIT effectiveness.” 

a June 27, 2003, Inspector General interview witl^TC^Chief of Operations, 

The record of that interview (2003-jH2MG^tates: stated that the 

Agency’s Al-Qa’ida program has been very effective. • views the intelligence as the main criteria 

forjudging the success of the program; specifically, intelligence that has allowed CTC to take other terrorists off the 
street and to prevent terrorist attacks. This is information that CTC could not have gotten any other way.” 

1063 November 26, 2001, Draft of Legal Appendix, Paragraph 5, “Hostile Interrogations: Legal Considerations for 
CIA Officers.” This document includes information regarding Paragraph 4. 

1064 November 26, 2001, Draft of Legal Appendix, Paragraph 5, “Hostile Interrogations: Legal Considerations for 
CIA Officers.” See Volume I for additional information. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 179 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



campaign against terrorism — states may be very unwilling to call the U.S. to 
task for torture when it resulted in saving thousands of lives” 1065 

On February 1, 2002, a CTC attorney researched the impact of the 
application of the Geneva Conventions (GC) on future CIA interrogation activities. 1066 The 
attorney wrote: 

“If the detainee is a POW and enjoys GC coverage, then the optic becomes 
how legally defensible is a particular act that probably violates the convention, 
but ultimately saves lives. I believe that [a named CIA attorney] ’s papers 
reflecting on necessity and anticipatory self defense are the two most obvious 
defenses available.” 1067 

(U) The Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) included the “necessity defense” 
in its August 1, 2002, memorandum to the White House Counsel, determining, among other 
things, that “under the current circumstances, necessity or self-defense may justify interrogation 
methods that might violate” the criminal prohibition against torture. 1068 The OLC memorandum 
states: 



“It appears to us that under the current circumstances the necessity t defense 
could be successfully maintained in response to an allegation of a Section 
2340A violation. . . .Under these circumstances, a detainee may possess 



1065 Italics added. November 26, 2001, Draft of Legal Appendix, Paragraph 5, “Hostile Interrogations: Legal 
Considerations for CIA Officers,” at 1. The CIA would later repeat both claims, representing to senior officials and 
the Department of Justice that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques produced intelligence that 
“saved lives,” and that this intelligence was otherwise unavailable. Further, on August 1, 2002, OLC issued an 
unclassified, but non-public opinion, in the form of a memorandum to White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, 
analyzing whether certain interrogation methods would violate 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A. The memorandum 
provides a similar rationale for the necessity defense, stating, “certain justification defenses might be available that 
would potentially eliminate criminal liability. Standard criminal law defenses of necessity and self-defense could 
justify interrogation methods needed to elicit information to prevent a direct and imminent threat to the United 
States and its citizens.” The memorandum later concludes: “even if an interrogation method might violate Section 
2340A, necessity or self-defense could provide justifications that would eliminate any criminal liability.” 



1066 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
date: February 1, 2002. 

1067 Italics added. Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 



and [REDACTED]; subject: “POW’s and Questioning”; 

and [REDACTED]; subject: “POW’s and 



Questioning”; date: February 1, 2002. In response to a request from the Department of Justice’s Office of 
Professional Responsibility (OPR), the CIA provided two memoranda - one dated November 7, 2001, the other 
undated - neither of which discussed the necessity defense. The OPR report states: “Although the CIA Office of 
General Counsel (OGC) told us that these were the only CIA memoranda in its possession on interrogation policy, 
some of the infonnation we obtained from the CIA suggested otherwise. In an internal email message dated 
February 1, 2002, from CTC attorney [REDACTED] to [REDACTED], [REDACTED] referred to ‘[CIA Attorney 
[REDACTED]] papers reflecting on necessity and anticipatory self defense.’” See Department of Justice, Office of 
Professional Responsibility, Report. Investigation into the Office of Legal Counsel’s Memoranda Concerning Issues 
Relating to the Central Intelligence Agency’s Use of ‘Enhanced Interrogation Techniques’ on Suspected Terrorists, 
July 29, 2009, pp. 31-32. 

1068 Memorandum for Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President, from Jay C. Bybee, Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, “Re Standards of Conduct for Interrogation under 18 U.S.C 
2340-2340A,” the U.S. Federal Torture Statute. 

I nr 'iH in 

Page 180 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



information that could enable the United States to prevent attacks that 
potentially could equal or surpass the September 1 1 attacks in their magnitude. 

Clearly, any harm that might occur during an interrogation would pale to 
insignificance compared to the harm avoided by preventing such an attack, 
which could take hundreds or thousands of lives.” 1069 

According to a report by the Department of Justice Office of 
Professional Responsibility (OPR), released in July 2009, Deputy Assistant Attorney General 
John Yoo “acknowledged that the CIA may have indirectly suggested the new sections [related 
to Commander-in-Chief authority and possible defenses, including the necessity defense] by 
asking him what would happen in a case where an interrogator went ‘over the line’ and 
inadvertently violated the statute.” Yoo also told the OPR that he drafted those relevant sections. 
Another senior Department of Justice lawyer at the time, Patrick Philbin, informed the OPR that 
when he told Yoo that the sections were superfluous and should be removed, Yoo responded, 
“They want it in there.” The CIA’s former Deputy General Counsel John Rizzo told the OPR 
that the CIA did not request the addition of the sections. 1070 In his response to the OPR report, 
Assistant Attorney General Jay Bybee stated that the “ticking time bomb” that could justify the 
necessity defense was, in fact, a “real world” scenario. According to Bybee, “the OLC attorneys 
working on the [August 1, 2002] Memo had been briefed on the apprehension of Jose Padilla on 
May 8, 2002. Padilla was believed to have built and planted a dirty bomb.” 1071 The August 1, 
2002, memorandum states that the “[interrogation of captured al Qaida operatives allegedly 
allowed U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies to track Padilla and to detain him upon 
his entry into the United States.” 1072 This information was inaccurate. 1073 



1069 Italics added. Memorandum for Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President, Re: Standards of Conduct for 
Interrogation under 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A, pp. 39-41. On December 30, 2004, the OLC issued a new 
memorandum superseding the August 1, 2002, memorandum in its entirety. The OLC wrote that “[b]ecause the 
discussion in [the August 1, 2002] memorandum concerning the President’s Commander-in-Chief power and the 
potential defenses to liability was - and remains — unnecessary, it has been eliminated from the analysis that follows. 
Consideration of the bounds of any such authority would be inconsistent with the President’s unequivocal directive 
that United States personnel not engage in torture.” ( See Memorandum for James B. Comey, Deputy Attorney 
General, Re: Legal Standards Applicable Under 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A). No CIA detainees were subjected to 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques between the issuance of the December 2004 memorandum and May 
2005, when the OLC opined on the application of the federal prohibition on torture to the techniques. 

1070 Department of Justice, Office of Professional Responsibility, Report, Investigation into the Office of Legal 
Counsel’s Memoranda Concerning Issues Relating to the Central Intelligence Agency’s Use of ‘Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques’ on Suspected Terrorists, July 29, 2009, p. 51. 

1071 Bybee response, at 74, n. 6, cited in the OPR Report at fn. 171. Department of Justice, Office of Professional 
Responsibility, Report, Investigation into the Office of Legal Counsel’s Memoranda Concerning Issues Relating to 
the Central Intelligence Agency’s Use of ‘Enhanced Interrogation Techniques’ on Suspected Terrorists, July 29, 



2009. 

1072 Memorandum for Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President, Re: Standards of Conduct for Interrogation 
under 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A. 

1073 See section of this summary and Volume II on the Thwarting of the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings Plot and the 
Capture of Jose Padilla. 

mi 1 1 1 1 1 i nil i m m 

Page 181 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



With the issuance on August 1, 2002, of a second OLC 
memorandum specific to Abu Zubaydah, 1074 the CIA initiated the use of its enhanced 
interrogation techniques. After the CIA subjected Abu Zubaydah and other CIA detainees to the 
techniques, the CIA made increasingly stronger assertions about the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
interrogation program, eventually asserting that the CIA interrogation program “saved lives,” 1075 
and that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was necessary, as the 
intelligence obtained could not have been acquired in any other way. 1076 

Many of the representations made by the CIA about the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were first made in the spring of 
2003 and evolved over the course of the year and into early 2004. In April 2003, CIA officers 
told the CIA’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) that KSM, who had been subjected to the 
techniques between March |, 2003, and March 25, 2003, was still not fully cooperative. For 
example, on April 3, 2003, more than a week after the CIA had discontinued th e use of it s 
enhanced interrogation techniques on KSM, the deputy chief of ALEC Station, flHB 

informedtheOIG that KSM had made “remarkable progress,” but there was “a lot 
more to be done.” did not cite any specific intelligence obtained from KSM in this 

context. 1077 

On June 27, 2003, more than three months after the CIA had 
ceased using its enhan ced interrogation techniques against KSM, CTC Chief of Operations 

told the OIG that he was convinced that KSM “knows more and is just 



1074 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 

1075 Among other documents, see CIA memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 
2003,” prepared by CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CIA 
Interrogation Program,” dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials; Memorandum to the 
Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, dated February 27, 2004, with the 
subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program’ 
(2003-7 123-IG),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities,” dated 
February 24, 2004; and the September 6, 2006, CIA-vetted speech by the President on the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. 

1076 See, among other examples, interview of James Pavitt, by and [REDACTED], Office of the 

Inspector General, August 21, 2003; Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for 
Operations; subject: re Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program” 2003-7123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of 
CIA’s Counterterrorism Detentioimi^lnterrogat^ Activities; and a June 27, 2003, Inspec tor General inte rview of 
the Chief of Operations CTC, Th e record of that interview states: “liHHHHh stated 

that the Agency’s AI-Qa’ida program has been very effective. views the intelligence as the main 

criteria forjudging the success of the program; specifically, intelligence that has allowed CTC to take other terrorists 
off the street and tomjeventtenorist attacks. This is information that CTC could not have gotten any other way.” 

1077 Interview of^^m by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 3, 

2003. On Apri^l^OO^KTC analyst told the IG that KSM “has not provided anything significant to date.” ( See 
interview by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 21, 

2003.) On April 30, 2003, one of KSM’s interrogators pointed to “information on hijackings, brid ges in Ne w York, 
and nucle ar plants,” and infonnation on hidden uranium, which was never found. See interview of H|B 
mam. by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED]^ffic^^h^nspecto^eneral, April 30, 2003. 

Mil 'll! Ill I 'l'l ( j l GIIM 

Page 1 82 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET 



/Y NOFOR N 



waiting for us to ask the right questions.” 1078 H||^| then provided two examples of 
information that KSM had not provided until he was asked specifically about the matters by CIA 
interrogators: information on the “tallest building in California” plot (also known as the “Second 
Wave” plot), and the inclusion of a building in Canary Wharf as a target in the plotting against 
Heathrow Airport. 1079 Asked if he could thinkofanyinstances in which information from CIA 
detainees had led to the arrest of a terrorist, HIHHI stated only that Majid Khan provided 
information that led to the arrest of Iyman Faris by the FBI. 1080 This information was inaccurate, 
as Majid Khan was not in CIA custody when he provided information on Iyman Faris. 1081 

represented to the OIG that the CIA’s interrogation 
program was “very effective,” and that the intelligence obtained from CIA detainees was “the 
main criteria forjudging the success of the program; specifically, intellige nce that has allo wed 
CTC to take other terrorists off the street and to prevent terrorist attacks.” also 

told the OIG that the information obtained from CIA interrogations was “information that CTC 
could not have gotten any other way.” 1082 

(U) On June 26, 2003, President Bush issued a statement for the United Nations International 
Day in Support of Victims of Torture. That statement — referenced in multiple news articles — 
relayed that the: 

“United States is committed to the world-wide elimination of torture and we 
are leading this fight by example. I call on all governments to join with the 
United States and the community of law-abiding nations in prohibiting, 
investigating, and prosecuting all acts of torture and in undertaking to prevent 
other cruel and unusual punishment.” 1083 

The following day, after the Washington Post published an article 
on the Administration’s detainee policy, CIA Deputy General Counsel John Rizzo called John 
Bellinger, the legal advisor to the National Security Council. According to an email from Rizzo 
to other senior CIA officers, Rizzo called Bellinger to: 




1078 told the OIG that KSM was asked about the plan to hijack an airplane in Malaysia and fly it into 

the Library Tower in Los Angeles, which the CIA had learned fro m another detainee. That detainee was Masran bin 
Arshad, who was in foreign government custody. told the OIG that KSM “provided information on 

the Heathrow/Canary Wharf option, but not until personnel at [DETENTION SITE BLUE] asked him about a 



picture he d rew of an I-beam.’* Se e 
Operations, 

1079 




|, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Chief of 
, Counterterrorist Center (2003-7123-IG); date: 27 June 2003. 
j, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Chief of Operations, ["" 

Counterterrorist Center (2003-7123-IG); date: 27 June 2003. See sections of this summary and Volume II on the 
Thwarting of the Second Wave Plot and the Discovery of the Al-Ghuraba Group, and the Thwarting of the 
He athrow Airport a nd Canary Wharf Plotting. 

1080 HUH’ Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Chief of Operations, Counterterrorist 
Center (2003-7123-IG); date: 27 June 2003. 

1081 See section of t his summary and Volume II on the Identification, Capture, and Arrest of ly manFaris^^^^^^^ 

1082 mm, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Chief of Operations, BNSBUMUl 
Counterterrorist Center (2003-7123-IG); date: 27 June 2003. 

1083 June 26, 2003, Statement by the President, United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2003/06/20030626-3.html. 

TOP 

Page 183 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



“express our surprise and concern at some of the statements attributed to the 
Administration in the piece, particularly the Presidential statement on the UN 
International Day in Support of Victims of Torture as well as a quote from the 
Deputy White House Press Secretary Scott McClellan that all prisoners being 
held by the USG are being treated ‘humanely.’” 1084 

While Rizzo expressed the view that the presidential statement did 
not appear to contain anything “we can’t live with,” Rizzo conveyed to senior CIA leaders that it 
“might well be appropriate for us to seek written reaffirmation by some senior White House 
official that the Agency’s ongoing practices... are to continue.” 1085 

On July 3, 2003, DCI George Tenet sent a memorandum to 
National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice seeking reaffirmation of the Administration’s 
support for the CIA’s detention and interrogation policies and practices. The memorandum 
stated that the reaffirmation was sought because: 



“recent Administration responses to inquiries and resulting media reporting 
about the Administration’s position have created the impression that these 
[interrogation] techniques are not used by U.S. personnel and are no longer 
approved as a policy matter.” 1086 



While the CIA was preparing to meet with the White House on the 
reaffirmation of the CIA interrogation program, CIA personnel provided additional inaccurate 
information about the “effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to the 
OIG, as well as to senior CIA leadership. These inaccurate representations described the 
“thwarting” of specific plots and the capture of specific terrorists attributed to the interrogation 
of CIA detainees and the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 




) On July 16, 2003, Deputy Chief of ALEC Station 



was interviewed again by the OIG. In this interview 



asserted that KSM 



“provided information that helped lead to the arrest of’ Iyman Faris, Uzhair Paracha, Saleh al- 
Marri, Majid Khan, and Ammar al-Baluchi. 1087 These representations were almost entirely 
inaccurate. 



1084 Email from: John Rizzo; to: John MosemanJ 



|; cc: Buzzy Krongard, Scott Muller, William 



Harlow; subject: Today’s Washington Post Piece on Administration Detainee Policy; date: June 27, 2003. 



1085 Email from: John Rizzo; to: John Moseman, 



|; cc: Buzzy Krongard, Scott Muller, William 



Harlow; subject: Today’s Washington Post Piece on Administration Detainee Policy; date: June 27, 2003. 

1086 July 3, 2003, CIA Memorandum for National Security Advisor from Director of Central Intelligence George J. 
Tenet with the Subject: Reaffinnation of the Central Intelligence Agency’s Interrogation Program. See also Scott 
Muller, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; date: 5 August 
200 3 (OGC-FQ-20 03-50078). 

], Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Deputy Chief, | 

Counterterrorist Center ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003. 

1088 See sections of this summary and Volume II on the Identification, Capture, and Arrest of Iyman Faris; the 
Identification and Arrests of Uzhair and Saifullah Paracha; the Identification and Arrest of Saleh al-Marri; the 
Capture of Majid Khan; and the Thwarting oDh^arach^lot^regairiingthecapture of Ammar al-Baluchi). 

TOP 

Page 184 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



U NQF Q RN 



also informed the OIG that information from CIA 
detainees “provided a wealth of information about Al-Qa’ida plots,” including: a terrorist plot in 
Saudi Arabia against Israel; a plot against the U.S. Consulate in Karachi, Pakistan; a plot against 
Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf; a plot to derail trains; a plot against subways; a gas station 
plot; a plot against the “tallest building” in California; a plot against suspension bridges; and a 
plot to poison water supplies. 1089 Much of this information was inaccurate. 1090 According to 
OIG records, “[o]n the question of whether actual plots had been thwarted, °pi ne d 

that since the operatives involved i n many of the above plots had been arrested, [CTC had], in 
effect, thwarted the operation[s] ” |HHI provided a list to the OIG of termnst^aotured and 
the plots with which they were associated. None of the individuals listed by were 

captured as a result of reporting from CIA detainees. 1091 

During this same period in 2003, CIA officers were compiling 
similar info rmation for CIA leadership. On July 18, 2003, the chief of ALEC Station, HB8M 
wrote an email to ALEC Station officers requesting information on the “value and 
impact” of CIA detainee information on behalf of the CIA Rendition^lroup (RDG), 1092 which 
he stated was being compiled for senior CIA leadership. 1093 wrote that “[o]ne way to 

assist now is to provide input to RDG on highlights of intel and ops reporting from the 
detainees,” in particular “reporting that helped reveal or stop plots, reporting that clinched the 
identity of terrorist suspects, etc.” 1094 The first portion o^h^esponse^ompiled by ALEC 
Station, was drafted by Deputy Chief of ALEC Station who wrote that CIA 

detainee reporting “plays a key role in our ability to identify and capture al-Qa’ida terrorist^ 
including those who were planning to attack inside the United States.” In an email, HHB 
wrote that “[t]he ability of the detainees to identify many operatives previously unknown to us or 
to the FBI resulted in the successful capture/detention of several terrorists,” and that the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “key” to acquiring this information on these 
operatives. As examples of operatives “previously unknown” to the CIA and the FBI and 
identified by CIA detainees, cited Jose Padilla, Binyam Mohammed, Majid Khan, 



1089 



, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Deputy Chief, Counterterrorist Center 
ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003. 

1090 See sections of this summary and Volume II on the Thwarting of the Karachi Plots; the Thwarting of the 
Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf Plotting; the Identification, Capture, and Arrest of Iyman Paris; the Capture of 
Majid Khan; the Thwarting of the Second Wave Plot and the Discovery of the Al-Ghuraba Group; and the KSM 
det ainee revie w in Volume El. 

1091 m listed Majid Khan (gas station and poison plotting), Iyman Faris (the suspension bridge plot, as well as 
a possible shopping mall plot), Khallad bin Attash (the Heathrow plot), Masran bin Arshad (the “tallest building” 
plot), and Ammar al-Baluchi (the plot against the U.S. consulate in Karachi). See relevant sections of this summary 
and Volume n for additional information. 

1092 As noted, the “Renditions and Interrogations Group,” is also referred to as the “Renditions Group,” the 
“Rendition, Detention^n^nte^gation Group,” “RDI ,” and “RDG” in CI A records. 

1093 Email from: to: DQ_CTC_ALEC Group Chiefs; cc: 






|; subject: value of detainees; date: July 18, 2003, at 01:09 PM. 

1094 Email from: to: DO_CTC_ALEC Group Chiefs; cc: 






; subject: value of detainees; date: July 18, 2003, at 01:09 PM. 

TOP SECRET# 

Page 185 of 499 



//NOF O R N 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Iymai^ans, and Sayf al-Rahman Paracha. 1095 These representations were inaccurate. 1096 
HM email concluded: 



“Simply put, detainee information has saved countless American lives inside 
the US and abroad. We believe there is no doubt al-Qa’ida would have 
succeeded in launching additional attacks in the US and that the information 
obtained from these detainees through the use of enhanced measures was key 
to unlocking this information. It is our assessment that if CIA loses the ability 
to interrogate and use enhanced measures in a responsible way, we will not be 
able to effectively prosecute this war.” 1097 



The information relayed from ALEC Station to RDG in July 2003 
for CIA leadership also included information from a CIA assessment entitled “Significant 
Detainee Reporting.” 1098 That document included information that was largely congruent with 
CIA records. It stated that KSM provided details on the Heathrow Airport Plot and the Karachi 
Plots only after being confronted with the capture of Khallad bin Attash and Ammar al- 
Baluchi; 1099 that with regard to plots inside the United States, KSM had only admitted to plots 
that had been abandoned or already disrupted; that KSM fabricated information in order to tell 
CIA interrogators “what he thought they wanted to hear”; and that KSM generally only provided 
information when “boxed in” by information already known to CIA debriefers. 11 00 This 
information was not included in CIA representations to policymakers later that month. 



On July 29, 2003, as a result of DCI Tenet’s July 3, 2003, request 
seeking reaffirmation of the CIA’s detention and interrogation policies and practices, Tenet and 
CIA General Counsel Scott Muller conducted a briefing for a subset of the National Security 






, [REDACTED], 



1095 Email from: 

[REDACT ED], [REDACTED],] 

|; subject: v alue of detainees; date: July 18, 20 03, at 2:30:09 PM; email from: 

DO_CTC_ALEC Chiefs Groups , 

[RED ACTED], 

|; subject: Re: value of detainees; date: July 18, 2003, at 3:57:45 PM. 

1096 See sections of this summary and Volume II on the Thwarting of the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings Plot and the 
Capture of Jose Padilla; the Capture of Majid Khan; the Identification, Capture, and Arrest of Iyman Paris; and the 
Identification and Arrests of Uzhair and Saifullah Paracha. 




1097 Italics added. Email from: 




|, [REDACTED], 
2003, at 3:57:45 PM. 

1098 Email from: 





D^^^^LECGroupChie^ 

; subject: Re: value of detainees; date: July 18, 
I, DO_CTC_ALEC Group Chiefs, | 




[REDACTED], cc: subject: Re: value of detainees; date: July 18, 2003, at 3:57:45 

PM. See CIA document “Significant Detainee Reporting.” 

1099 See section of this summary and Volume II on the Thwarting of the Karachi Plots, and the KSM detainee review 
in Volume III. 

, DO_CTC_ALEC Group Chiefs, I 




[REDACTED], 



; subject: Re: value of detainees; date: July 18, 2003, at 3:57:45 



PM. See also “Significant Detainee Repor ting” and KS M detain ee review in Vo lume III. 

mi 1 'ii i in i "g— — i mi dm i 

Page 186 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 




Council principals. 1 101 According to a CIA memorandum, Muller represented that CIA 
“detainees subject to the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced 
significant intelligence information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives.” 1102 

The CIA briefing provided the “results” of using the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques in briefing slides with the heading: “RESULTS: MAJOR 
THREAT INFO.” The slides represented that KSM provided information on “[ajttack plans 
against US Capitol, other US landmarks”; “[ajttacks against Chicago, New York, Los Angeles; 
against towers, subways, trains, reservoirs, Hebrew centers, Nuclear power plants”; and the 
“Heathrow and Canary Wharf Plot.” The slides also represented that KSM identified Iyman 
Faris, the “Majid Khan family,” and Sayf al-Rahman Paracha. 1103 These representations were 
largely inaccurate. 1104 

The CIA slides represented that “major threat” information was 
obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on CIA detainee ‘Abd al- 
Rahim al-Nashiri regarding “US Navy Ships in the Straits of Hormuz.” This representation was 
inaccurate and omitted material facts. 1105 The CIA slides further indicated that “major threat” 
information was obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against 
CIA detainee Ramzi bin al-Shibh — specifically that bin al-Shibh “[ijdentified Hawsawi” and 



1101 CIA Memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program," dated 
July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. Those attending the meeting included the director of the 
CIA, George Tenet; the CIA general counsel, Scott Muller; Vice President Cheney; National Security Advisor Rice; 
White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales; Attorney General Ashcroft; Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of 
Legal Counsel, Patrick Philbin; and counsel to the National Security Council, John Bellinger. 

1,02 CIA Memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program " dated 
July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. 

1 103 CIA Memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program," dated 
July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. 

1,04 CIA records indicate that the “attacks,” “attack plans,” and “targets” discussed by KSM were well known to the 



Intelligence Community prior to any reporting from CIA detainees, or were merely ideas for attacks that were 
proposed, but never operationalized. The CIA briefing slides made no mention of KSM withholding or fabricating 
information during and after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. See relevant sections of this 
summary and Volume II, as well as the KSM detainee review in Volume HI. 

1105 CIA records indicate that al-Nashiri provided details on multiple terrorist plots — including plans to target ships 
in the Strait of Hormuz — prior to his CIA detention and the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
With regard to the targeting of ships in the Strait of Hormuz, this information was provided by al-Nashiri while he 




Page 1 87 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NQFORN 



provided “major threat” information on “[ajttacks against Nuclear Power Plants, Hebrew 
Centers.” This representation was inaccurate and omitted material facts. 1106 



context of “[mjajor threats [that] were countered and attacks 
averted,” the CIA slides represented that “major threat” information was obtained from the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Khallad bin Attash on an “[ajttack 
against U.S. Consulate in Karachi.” This representation was inaccurate. 1107 The CIA slides 
further represented that “major threat” information was obtained from the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques on CIA detainee Abu Zubaydah, resulting in the 
“ [identification of [Jose] Padilla, Richard Reid,” as well as information on “[a]ttacks on banks, 
subways, petroleum and aircraft industries.” These representations were inaccurate. 1108 



The briefing slides, which contained additional inaccuracies 
detailed in Volume II of the Committee Study, were used, at least in part, for CIA briefings for 



1106 Al-Hawsawi was linked to the September 1 1, 2001, attacks ancHargeted by the CIA and othe r intellig ence 

agencies prioM^ir^^hiblfscap^re. ( See WASHINGTON BBBf(232012 Z MAY 02), CIA (032022Z 
APR02); 17743 (051408Z MAR 02); DIRECTOR ■■ (231756Z APR 02); ALEC 

IHHfl (161821Z JUL 03y^Al-Hawsawi’s arrest on March l, 2003, was unrelated to any reporting from CIA 
detainees. ( See ALEC |i|| (161821Z JUL 03).) With regard to the referenced “attacks,” no operational plots 
targeting the sites referenced were ever identified by the CIA. Personnel at CIA Headquarters concluded in 2005 
that the “most significant” intelligence derived from Ramzi bin al-Shibh was obtained prior to his rendition to CIA 
custody and the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. According to a 2005 CIA assessment, the 
“most significant” reporting from Ramzi bin al-Shibh o n future attacks was background information related to al- 
Qa’ida’s plans to attack Heathrow Airport. ( See ALEC ||H^| (302240Z JUN 05).) Ramzi bin al-Shibh provided 
the majority of this information in mid-Octobe^002, while in the custody of a foreign government and prior to 
being transferred to CIA custody. ( See CIA HfHH ^HllHilimH-) See also detainee review of Ramzi bin al- 
Shibh in Volume III. 

1107 See the section of this summary and Volume II on the Thwarting of the Karachi Plots. CIA officers in m 
wrote of the referenced reporting from bin Attash: “[w]hile reporting from both [al-Baluchi and bin Attash] was 
chilling-[CIA officers] had become aware of most of this reporting either through previous information or through 
interviews of al-Baluchi and Ba Attash prioi^tHheir transfer out of Karachi.” This cable also stated, “[a]s noted in 
severalprevious c ables, in December 20 02 HB Consulate became aware of the threat to Consulate officials.” See 

wmm 145 iohhbi. 

1108 For information on the “[identification of [Jose] Padilla,” see the section of this summary and Volume II on the 
Thwarting of the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings Plot and the Capture of Jose Padilla. Richard Reid was arrested in 
December 2001, prior to Abu Zubaydah’s capture. See multiple open source reporting and Department of Justice 
materials, including, United States v. Richard Reid Indictment, U.S. District Court, District of Massachusetts, 
January 16, 2002. Abu Zubaydah provided information on potential places al-Qa’ida might target, including banks 
and subways, shortly after his capture to FBI interrogators, months prior to the use of the CIA’s “enhanced 
interrogation techniques” in August 2002. See Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the 
interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS #2010-2939). See also Abu Zubaydah detainee review in 
Volume III. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 188 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Secretary of State Powell and Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, 1109 as well as for Assistant 
Attorney General Jack Goldsmith. 1110 

In subsequent interviews of CIA personnel, the OIG received 
information that contradicted other CIA repre sentations about the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. The chief of the Branch of the UBL Group at CTC described at 
length how the arrests of Majid Khan and Iyman Faris were unrelated to reporting from CIA 
detainees. 1111 The deputy director for law enforcement for the FBI’s Counterterrorism Division 
told the OIG how Uzhair Paracha and FBI operational activities were ultimately responsible for 
the capture of Sayf al-Rahman Paracha. 1112 The chief of targeting and special requirements for 
CTC’s al-Q a’ida Department and former chief of the Abu Zubaydah Task Force, HHHI 
mm, told the OIG that “the often-cited example of Zubaydah identifying Padilla is not 
quite accurate.” 1113 According to “[n]ot only did [Abu Zubaydah^iot tell us who 

Padilla was, his information alone would never have led us to Padilla.” stated that the 

Pakistanis had told the CIA about Jose Padilla and his partner prior to Abu Zubaydah providing 
any information on the pair, relaying, “[i]n essence, CTC got lucky.” 1114 

At the same time, however, CIA personnel provided inaccurate 
examples of the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to the OIG. The 
deputy chief of the Al-Qa’ida Department of CTC told the OIG that “KSM gave us Majid Khan 
and Uzair Paracha.” 1 115 Deputy DCI John McLaughlin told the OIG that information from KSM 
“led to the capture” of Majid Khan, which in turn led to the capture of Hambali. McLaughlin 
also represented that “the capture of Richard Reid was a result of modus operandi information 
obtained from [Abu] Zubaydah.” 1116 These representations were inaccurate. 1117 



In addition to these specific inaccurate examples, CIA leadership 
made additional general claims to the OIG about the effectiveness of the CIA interrogation 



1,09 Memorandum for the Record; subject: CIA Interrogation Program; September 27, 2003 (OGC-FO-2003-50088). 
Slides, CIA Interrogation Program, 16 September 2003. The Memorandum for the Record drafted by John Bellinger 
refers to a “detailed handout” provided by the CIA. See John B. Bellinger, III, Senior Associate Counsel to the 
President and Legal Advisor, National Security Council; Memorandum for the Record; subject: Briefing of 
Secretaries Powell and Rumsfeld regarding Interrogation of High-Value Detainees; date: September 30, 2003. 

1110 Scott W. Muller; Memorandum for the Record; Interrogation briefing for Jack Goldsmith; date: 16 October 2003 



(OGC-FO-2003-50097). 

1111 Interview of chief of the 1111 Branch of the UBL Group, by Office of the 

Inspector Gener al, July 30, 2003 . 

1112 Interview of | 



|, Office of the Inspector 
|, Office of the Inspector 



iy Office of the Inspector General, A ugust 5, 2003. 

11,3 August 19, 2003, Memorandum for the Record, meeting with \ 

General. 

1,14 August 19, 2003, Memorandum for the Record, meeting with | 

Ge neral. This info rmation was not included in the IG Special Review. 

1115 Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Deputy Chief, Counterterrorist Center Al- 
Qa’ida Department; date: 28 July 2003. 

1116 Interview of John E. McLaughlin, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 
September 5, 2003. This information was included in the CIA’s July 2003 briefing slides. Richard Reid was 
arrested in December 2001 , prior to the capture of Abu Zubaydah. 

1,17 See the section in this summary and in Volume II on the Capture of Majid Khan; the Capture of Hambali; and 
the Identification and Arrests of Uzhair and Saifullah Paracha. See also the KSM detainee review in Volume IB. 
Richard Reid was arrested prior to the captureofAbuZubaydah^^^^^^^^ 

i (ii 1 'iii iii i"— i i mi mu i 

Page 189 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



program that highlighted the “critical threat information” that could only be acquired by using 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against CIA detainees. Jose Rodriguez, then CTC 
director, told the CIA OIG that “the use of EITs has saved lives and prevented terrorist 
operations from occurring.” 1118 Deputy DCI McLaughlin told the OIG that he “believes the use 
of EITs has proven critical to CIA’s efforts in the war on terrorism.” 1119 DDO Pavitt stated that 
the program was “invaluable to U.S. national security,” that “American lives have been saved as 
a result of information received from detainees,” and that the CIA “has been able to obtain 
information that would not have been obtained without the use of EITs.” 1120 According to OIG 
records, DCI Tenet stated he “firmly believes that the interrogation program, and specifically the 
use of EITs, has saved many lives.” Tenet added that the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques was “extremely valuable” in obtaining “enormous amounts of critical 
threat information,” and that he did not believe that the information could have been gained any 
other way. 1121 



On January 2, 2004, CIA Inspector General John Helgerson 
provided a draft of the OIG Special Review, entitled “Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Program,” to senior CIA officials for comment. The draft Special Review, which 
was based on numerous interviews of CIA personnel, as well as additional research by the OIG, 
described the origins of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, the detention sites that 
were operational at the time of the review, and the guidance that had been provided on both 
interrogation and detention. The draft also identified a number of unauthorized interrogation 
techniques that had been used, 1122 and concluded that, in a number of cases, CIA interrogations 
went “well beyond what was articulated in the written DOJ legal opinion of 1 August 2002.” 1123 



1118 Interview of Jose E. Rodriguez, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 
12,2003. 

1119 Interview of John E. McLaughlin, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 
September 5, 2003. 

1.20 Pavitt also stated that by “September, October and November” of 2002, “they saw a cl ear benefit” to th e use of 

CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Zubaydah (Interview of James Pavitt, by and 

[REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 21, 2003). 

1.21 Interview of George Tenet, by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 8 September, 
2003. 



1122 For example, the draft described interrogators placing pressure on a detainee’s artery, conducting mock 
executions, blowing cigarette or cigar smoke into a detainee’s face, using cold water to interrogate detainees, and 
subjecting a detainee to a “hard takedown.” In an interview conducted after Gul Rahman’s death at DETENTION 
SITE COBALT, Dr. DUNBAR described a “rough takedown.” The interview report stated: “According to 
[DUNBAR], there were approximately five CIA officers from the renditions team. Each one had a role during the 
takedown and it was thoroughly planned and rehearsed. They opened the door of [a detainee] cell and rushed in 
screaming and yelling for him to ‘get down.’ They dragged him outside, cut off his clothes and secured him with 
Mylar tape. They covered his head with a hood and ran him up and down a long corridor adjacent to his cell. They 
slapped him and punched him several times. [DUNBAR] stated that although it was obvious they were not trying to 
hit him as hard as they could, a couple of times the punches were forceful. As they ran him along the corridor, a 
couple of times he fell and they dragged him through the dirt (the floor outside of the cells is dirt). [The detainee] 
did acquire a number of abrasions on his face, legs, and hands, but nothing that required medical attention.” 
DUNBAR stated that after “something like this is done, interrogators should speak to th e prisoner to ‘give the m 
something to think about.’” See Memorandum for Deputy Director of Operations, from 

January 28, 2003, Subject: Death Investigation - Gul Rahman, pp. 21-22, paragraph 34. 

1123 CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program (2003-7 123-IG), 
January 2004. 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 190 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ / 



//NOFORN 



The draft report repeated the inaccurate examples of the “effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques that had been conveyed by CIA officers to OIG personnel, 1124 but 
nonetheless concluded: 

“[w]ith the capture of some of the operatives for the above-mentioned plots, 
it is not clear whether these plots have been thwarted or if they remain viable 
or even if they were fabricated in the first place. This Review did not 
uncover any evidence that these plots were imminent.” 1125 

After reviewing the draft Special Review, including the OlG’s 
qualified conclusions about the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques^he 
CIA’s CTC beganprcparin^^iighly critical response. In preparation for that response, HhHH 
UCTC Legal, requested additional information that could be used as 
evidence fo r the effectiv eness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from CTC 
personnel. sent an email seeking “a list of specific plots that have been thwarted by 

the use of de tainee reporting that we acquired following the use of enhanced techniques.” 

| BHHMH noted that he would compile the information, “emphasizing that hundreds or 
thousands of inn ocent lives ha ve been saved as a result of our use of those techniques. . . .” 1126 In 
a separate email, emphasized that it was “critical” that the information “establish 

direct links between the application of the enhanced interrogation techniques and the production 
of intelligence that directly enabled the saving of innocent lives,” that the intelligence obtained 
after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques be “significantly different in nature 
from the intelligence acquired before the use of the enhanced techniques,” and that the 
information be “absolutely iro nclad” and “d emonstrably supported by cable citations, analytical 
pieces, or what have you.” 1127 further noted that “[w]e can expect to need to 

present these data to appropriately cleared personnel at the IG and on the Hill, to the Attorney 
General, and quite possibly to the President at some point, and they must be absolutely 
verifiable.” He concluded, “[i]t is not an exaggeration to say that the future of the program, and 
the consequent saving of innocent lives, may depend substantially upon the input you 
provide.” 1128 



1.24 The Special Review draft stated that KSM “provided information that helped lead to the arrests” of Sayf al- 

Rahman Paracha, Uzhair Paracha, Saleh al-Marri, and Majid Khan, and that KSM’s information “led to the 
investigation and prosecution” of lyman Faris. The draft Special Review also stated that information from Abu 
Zubaydah “helped lead to the identification” of Jose Padillaan^Binyam Muhammad. Finally, the draft included the 
“plots” described by Deputy Chief of ALEC Station during her July 16, 2003, interview. Most 

of the inaccurate representations would remain in the final version of the Special Review completed in May 2004. 
See CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program (2003-7123- 
IG), January 2004. 

1.25 CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program (2003-7 123-IG), 

January 2004. ^ 

1126 Email from: to: Scott Muller, John Rizzo, HHflHfH’ HUH HIHHH’ HHH 

and^^^^^H^f subject: “For the response to the IG report”; date: February 4, 2004, at 1:04:03 



PM. 

1127 Email from: 

February 10, 2004. 

1 128 Email from: 

February 10, 2004. As described in this su mmary 

TOP SECRET/; 



|; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: 

|; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: 

and in greater detail in the ful l Committee Study, the examples 

//NOFORN 



Page 191 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



Responding to the request for information, Deputy Chief of ALEC 
Station sent an email describin g intellige nce from KSM in which she wrote, 

“let’s be foward [sic] leaning.” 1129 The content of j^UB’s email would serve as a template 
on which future justifications^oi^he CIA program and the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques were based. 1130 email stated that “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s 

information alone has saved at least several hundred, possibly thousands, of lives.” She then 
wrote that KSM “identified” Iyman Faris, “who is now serving time in the US for his support to 
al-Qa’ida,” and “identified a photograph” of Saleh al-Marri, “whom the FBI suspected of some 
involvement with al-Qa’ida, but against whom we had no concrete information,” adding that al- 
Marri “is now being held on a material witness warrant.” email stated that KSM 

“provided information” on Majid Khan, who “is now in custody,” “identified a mec hanism for 
al-Qa’ida to smuggle explosives into the US,” and “identified” Jaffar al-Tayyar. 1131 
email also represented that “[a]fter the use of enhanced [interrogation techniques], [Abu 
Zubaydah] grew into what is now our most cooperative detainee,” and that Abu Zubaydah’s 
information “produced concrete results that helped saved lives.” 1132 The se representations we re 
almost entirely inaccurate. 1133 As she had in an interview with the OIG, ■■■^^^^^■^ 
former chief of the Abu Zubaydah Task Force, refuted this view, writing in an email that Abu 
Zubaydah “never really gave ‘this is the plot’ type of information,” that Abu Zubaydah discussed 
Jose Padilla prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and that “he never 
really gave us actionable intel to get them.” 1134 Separately, Deputy Chief of ALEC Station 



compiled were provided over the following years to the President, the Congress, the Department of Justice, and the 
American public. 

1129 Email from: 



cc: 



|, [REDACTE D], [REDA CTED], 
’s email 



|; subject: re Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: February 9, 2004. 
began: “here is my draft contribution... it’s late, I’m tired, so it’s not especially elegant... welcome any fact 
correcting I got wrong, but let’s be foward [sic] leaning.” The inaccurate information included in the email was 
use d in the CI A’s formal response to the OIG. 

|’s email and the subsequent DDO response to the OIG were used as the template for talking points on 



the program. See, for example, email from: 



|; subject: 



re EDITED Final - RE: Addition on KSM/AZ and measures (forwarding comments for response to draft Inspector 
Generalrevie w for paper for Condoleezza Rice in December 2004) ; da te: December 6, 2004; email from: 

1HR to: 

re EDITED Final - RE: Addition on KSM/AZ and measures (forwarding comments for response to draft Inspector 
General review for talking points in November 2005); date: November 4, 2005. 



|; subject: 



1131 



In response to 



’s email, one CIA officer asked whether “re the jaffar al-tayyar stuff, didnt [sic] we 



already have the full name from FBI before he confinned the name?” See email from: [REDACTED]; to: 



KSM/AZ and measures; date: February 10, 2004, at 09:38 AM 




|; subject: Re: Addition on 
|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

|; subject: re Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: February 9, 2004. 

1133 See relevant sections of this summary and Volume II on the eight primary CIA effectiveness representations and 
12 other prominentCIArepresentations of effectiveness. 

1134 Email from: to: cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], ^^Bi^BjohnRMuc^ [RED ACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], Jose Rodriguez, 
[REDACTED], [RED ACTED]T||^m^^^H, subject: Re: Please Read — Re CTC Response to the Draft IG 
Report^ate: February 10, 2004. As noted, in an August 19, 2003 i Memorandum for the Record detailing 
■Hi’s interview with the Office of the Inspector General, !■■! told the OIG that “the often-cited 
example of Zubaydah identifying Padilla is not quite accurate,” and that “[n]ot only did [Abu Zubaydah] not tell us 
who Padilla was, his infonnation alone wo uld never have led us to Padilla.” No ting that the Pakistani government 

TOP 

Page 192 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOF n SE G RET// 



//NOF O R N 



forwarded additional inaccurate information from CIA personnel in ALEC 
Station to CTC Legal related to KSM, 1135 al-Nashiri, 1136 and Hambali. 1137 

On February 27, 2004, DDO Pavitt submitted his formal response 
to the OIG draft Special Review in the form of a memorandum to the inspector general. Pavitt 
urged the CIA OIG not to “shy away from the conclusion that our efforts have thwarted attacks 
and saved lives,” and to “make it clear as well that the EITs (including the waterboard) have 
been indispensable to our successes.” 1138 Pavitt’ s memorandum included an attachment 
describing the “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities,” 
and why the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were necessary. The attachment stated: 



“Information we received from detained terrorists as a result of the lawful use 
of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has almost certainly saved 
countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence 
points clearly to the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our 



had told the CIA about Jose Padilla and his partner prior to Abu Zubaydah providing any information on the pair, 
stated, “[i]n essence, CTC got lucky.” This information was not included in the draft or final OIG 
Special Review. 

1,35 The information forwarded by m was related to the Heathrow Aiqiort plotting and stated that “[o]nly 
after enhanced measures” did KSM “admit that the sketch of a beam labeled Canary Wharf in his notebook was in 
fact an illustration that KSM the engineer drew himself to show another AQ operative that the beams in the Wharf - 
like those in the World Trade Center - would likely melt and collapse the building, killing all inside.” The email 
also stated that KSM “identified the leading operatives involved in both the UK and Saudi cells that would support 
the operation.” These representations were inaccurate. See the section of this summary and Volume II on the 
Thwarting of the Heathrow Airpo rt and Cana ry Wharf Plotting, and the KSM detainee review in Volume III. 

1136 The information forwarded by H^HI stated that, “subsequent to the application of enhanced measures,” the 
CIA “learned more in-depth details” about operational planning, “to include ongoing operations against both the US 
and Saudi interests in Saudi Arabia.” This representation omitted key information provided by al-Nashiri in foreign 
government custody and prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. See the ‘Abd al-Rahim al- 
Nashiri detainee review in Volume lU^^ 

1137 The information forwarded by stated that, “after the use of enhanced measures [Hambali] provided 

information that led to the wrap-up of an al-Qa’ida cell in Karachi, some of whose members were destined to be the 
second wave attack pilots inside the US after 911.... [TJheir identification and subsequent detention saved hundreds 
of lives.” This representation was inaccurate. See the section of this summary and Volume II on the Thwarting of 



to: 



the Second Wave Plo t and the Discovery of the Al-Ghuraba Group. (See email from: 

multiple subject: EDITED — Re: Heathrow plot 

insight from KSM; date: February 10, 2004, at 2:38:36 PM.) The email included the following text: “Here is 



Heathrow.” Below this text were forwarded emails from 

■ 

from KSM; date: February 10, 2004, at 01:34 PM; email from: 

|; subject: OGC rebuttal part 5 and final-Re: al-Nashiri; date: Februar 
email from: 





; subje ct: Heathrow 

to: HHHMM 

12, 2004, at 02:59 PM; 



See email from: 
lot insight 




|; subject: Re: al-Nashiri; date : February 10, 2004, at 06:1 1 PM; email from: 

jfHHHIIIil; subject: * immediate— Hambali Reporting; date: February 10, 2004, at 

ll:43AM. 

1138 Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) 
Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7 123-IG); 
date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

mi in iii i u'l'i 

Page 193 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQE Q R N 



allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks involving hundreds, if not 
thousands, of casualties.” 1139 

(TS/^IHIBHI^H^^) The attachment to Pavitt’s memorand um repeated much o f the 
inaccurate information contained in Deputy Chief of ALEC Station email 

about KSM and Abu Zubaydah, as well as the additional information ALEC Station personnel 
provided on KSM, al-Nashiri, and Hambali. In Pavitt’s memorandum, every intelligence success 
claim was preceded with some version of the phrase, “as a result of the lawful use of EITs.” 1140 
Inaccurate information provided to the OIG during interviews and in the Pavitt memorandum 
was included in the final version of the OIG’s Special Review. 1141 The relevant portion of the 
Special Review, including much of the inaccurate information, has been declassified. 1142 

As ^■■CTC Legal anticipated his 

February 10, 2004, email, much of the information provided to the inspector general on the 
“effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was later provided to 
policymakers and the Department of Justice as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 1143 

In late 2004, as the National Security Council was considering 
“endgame” options for CIA detainees, the CIA proposed a public relations campaign that would 
include disclosures about the “effectiveness” of the CIA program. CIA talking points prepared 
in December 2004 for the DCI to use with National Security Council principals stated that “[i]f 
done cleverly, selected disclosure of intelligence results could heighten the anxiety of terrorists at 
large about the sophistication of USG methods and underscore the seriousness of American 
commitment to prosecute aggressively the War on Terrorism.” 1144 The following month, the 



1,39 Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) 
Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7123-IG); 
date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

1140 Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) 
Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7123-IG); 
date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

1141 A review of CIA records found that almost all of the information in the Pavitt memorandum was inaccurate and 
unsupported by CIA interrogation and intelligence records. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that CIA officers 
“generally provided accurate information [to the Inspector General] on the operation and effectiveness of the 
program,” and that “with rare exceptions, [CIA officers] provided accurate assessments to the OIG.” 

1142 The CIA Inspector General Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program,” was 
declassified with redactions in May 2008. On August 24, 2009, some portions of the Review that were redacted in 
Ma y 2008, were unredacted and declassified. 

1143 wrote in an email: “We can expect to need to present these data to appropriately cleared personnel 

at the IG and on the Hill, to the Attorney G eneral, and quite pos sibly to the President at some point, and they must 
be absolutely verifiable.” ( See email from: to: [REDACTED]; subject: Addition on KSM/AZ 

and measures; date: February 10, 2004.) As detailed in this Study, the CIA consistently used the same 
“effectiveness” case studies. The eight most frequently cited “thwarted” plots and captured terrorists are examined 
in this summary, and in greater detail in the full Committee Study, as are 12 other prominent examples that the CIA 
has cited in the context of the “effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

1144 Talking Points for the DCI: DOD Proposals to Move Forward on Transfer of HVDs to Guantanamo, 16 
December 2004. 



TOP -S ECRE T# 



#NOFORN 



Page 194 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE G RET// 



//N O FORN 



CIA proposed that the public information campaign include details on the “intelligence gained 
and lives saved in HVD interrogations.” 1145 There was no immediate decision by the National 
Security Council about an “endgame” for CIA detainees or the proposed public information 
campaign. 

asked that information on the success of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program be 
compiled in anticipation of interviews of CIA personnel by Tom Brokaw of NBC News. The 
first draft included effectiveness claims relating to the “Second Wave” plotting, the Heathrow 
Airport plotting, the Karachi plotting, and the identification of a second shoe bomber. 1146 A 
subsequent draft sought to limit the information provided to what was already in the public 
record and included assertions about Issa a l-Hindi, Iy man Faris, and Sajid Badat. 1147 That day, 
Deputy Director of CTC Philip Mudd told that “we either get out and sell, or we get 

hammered, which has implications beyond the media. [CJongress reads it, cuts our authorities, 
messes up our budget.” 1148 The following day, the draft was cleared for release to the media. 1149 





1145 DCI Talking Points for Weekly Meeti ng with National Se curi ty Advisor, 12 January 2005; include d in emai l 
from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], 



|, John A. R izzo, 

; subject: Re: 

Coord on NSC Talkings for 1/14; date: January 11, 2005, at 03:33 PM. 

1146 The draft stated that the “Second Wave” plotting “was uncovered during the initial debriefings of a senior al- 
Qa’ida detainee,” that the Heathrow plotting “was also discovered as a result of detainee debriefings,” that the 
Karachi plotting “was revealed during the initial debriefings of two senior al-Qa’ida de tainees,” and that the CIA 
“learned form [ sic] detainee debri e fings of* the seco nd shoe bomber. (See email from: 

[REDACTED], 

|, [REDACTED], 





, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

I, [REDACTED], [REDACTED; cc: 



| [REDACTED], 

|; subject: FOR IMMEDIATE COORDINATION: summary of impact of detainee 
program; date: April 13, 2005, at 5:21 :37 PM.) These claims were inaccurate. See relevant sections of this 
summary and Volume II. 

1147 The draft discussed Issa al-Hindi, who had been referenced in the 9/1 1 Commission Report, stating that “[p]rior 
to KSM’s reporting, the U.S. Government was not aware of Issa’s casing activity, nor did we know his true 
identity.” It added that “KSM’s reporting was the impetus for an intense investigation, culminating in Issa’s 
identification and arrest.” The draft also included two examples that had not been in official public documents, but 
had been described in press stories. The first was that “KSM led U.S. investigators to an Ohio truck driver named 
Iyman Faris.” The second was that “KSM’s confes sions were also i nstrumental in determining the identity o f Saajid 
Badat,” the second shoe bomber. (See email from: 

MBi , ■■■■, [RED ACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED ], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



, Chief of Operations, ALEC Station; to: 





[REDACTED], 

subject: Brokaw interview: Take one; date: April 13, 2005, at 6:46:59 PM.) As described elsewhere, these claims 
were incongruent with CIA records. At least one earlier media account of KSM’s purported role in the arrest of 
Iyman Faris was provided in a book by an author who had extensive access to CIA officials. (See Ronald Kessler, 
The CIA at War, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 2003.). The CIA’s cooperation with the author is described 
elsewhere in this summary, as well as in more detail in the full Committee Stu dy. 

1 148 Sametime communication, between John P. Mudd and | 

19:56:05. 

1149 Email from: 

A. Rizzo, 

date: April 14, 2005, at 9:22:32 AM. 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 195 of 499 




; cc: [REDACTED],! 



|, April 13, 2005, from 19:23:50 to 

■■■■, [REDACTED], John 
; subject: Re: Brokaw interview: Take one; 

/NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET// 



//N OFORN 



On April 20, 2005, the same examples were circulated as part of an 
anticipated official public campaigi^o promote the “effectiveness” of the still-classified CIA 
program. 1150 In response, H|^H|CTC Legal, expressed concern that 

“the examples cited, while true, and perhaps as far as we can go, are not nearly the mo st striking 
examples of lives saved.” Referencing KSM’s reporting on Iyman Faris, noted that 

“we risk making ourselves look silly if the best we can do is the Brooklyn Brid ge - perhaps we 
should omit specific examples rather than ‘damn ourselves with faint praise.’” 
who offered the Heathrow Airport plot as an example, made the following suggestion: “Can 
[Office of Public Affairs] be more strongly declarative - ‘while we can’t provide details’ (or 
maybe we can) ‘the program has producedinteUigence that has directly saved lOO’s/lOOO’s of 
American and other innocent lives’?” HH|H| then attached claims originally compiled in 
February 2004 for the purpose of responding to the draft OIG Special Review which, he wrote, 
described “some of the actionable intelligence acquired as a result of the Program and the lawful 
use of such techniques.” 1151 The examples were inaccurate. 1152 

(TS/^^mm^/NE) On June 24, 2005, Dateline NBC aired a program, accompanied by 
several online articles, which quoted CIA Director Goss and Deputy Director of CTC Mudd, as 
well as anonymous “top American intelligence officials.” Among other claims, NBC reported 
that the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh “le[d] ultimately” to the captures of KSM and Khallad bin 
Attash. 1153 This information was inaccurate. 1154 

At the end of 2005, congressional concerns about the treatment of 
detainees again spurred interest at the CIA for public disclosures on the “effectiveness” of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Specifically, congressional action on the Detainee 
Treatment Act (the “McCain amendment”) prompted a CIA attorney working at the Office of the 
Director of National Intelligence to express concern that legislative support was needed for the 
CIA to continue to use its enhanced interrogation techniques, and that a public information 
campaign would be required to garner that support. The CIA attorney described the “striking” 
similarities between the public debate surrounding the McCain amendment and the situation in 
Israel in 1999, in which the Israeli Supreme Court had “ruled that several... techniques were 
possibly permissible, but require some form of legislative sanction,” and that the Israeli 



1150 See CIA document entitled, “INTERROGATION PROGRA M DRAFT PRES S BRIEFING,” from April 2005. 

1151 Email from: to cc: John Rizzo: subject: Re: 



1, Joh n Rizzo; subject: Re: 

me by COB TODAY Thanks; 




cc: 

-Comments Due to I 



Interrogation Program-Going Public Draft Talking Points- 
date: April 20, 2005, at 5:10:10 PM. 

1152 See the sections of this summary and Volume II on the Capture of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM) and the 
Thwarting of the Karachi Plots (regarding the capture of Khallad bin Attash). 

1,53 “The frightening evolution of al-Qaida; Decentralization has led to deadly staying power,” Dateline NBC, June 
24, 2005. In 2003, Ronald Kessler published a book with which the CIA cooperated that stated “intercepts and 
information developed months earlier after the arrest of Ramzi Binalshibh... allowed the CIA to trace [KSM].” The 
Kessler book also stated that the bin Attash capture was the “result” of interrogations of KSM. This information is 
incongruent with CIA records. See Ronald Kessler, The CIA at War, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 2003. See also 



email from: John A. Rizzo; to 



|, Scott W. Muller, 



[REDACTED]; subject: Re: CIA at War; date: January 22, 2004, at 09:28 AM). 

1154 See the sections of this summary and Volume 13 on the Capture of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM) and the 
Thwarting of the Karachi Plots (regarding the capture of Khallad bin Attash). 

mi 1 'ii ( i i nil ii i in 1 1 

Page 196 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



government “ultimately got limited legislative authority for a few specific techniques.” 1155 The 
CIA attorney then wrote: 

“Once this became a political reality here, it became incumbent on the 
Administration to publicly put forth some facts, if it wanted to preserve these 
powers. Yet, to date, the Administration has refused to put forth any specific 
examples of significant intelligence it adduced as a result of using any 
technique that could not reasonably be construed as cruel, inhuman or 
degrading. Not even any historical stuff from three or four years ago. What 
conclusions are to be drawn from the utter failure to offer a specific 
justification: That no such proof exists? That the Administration does not 
recognize the legitimacy of the political process on this issue? Or, that need to 
reserve the right to use these techniques really is not important enough to 
justify the compromise of even historical intelligence?” 1156 

As described in more detail in the full Committee Study, the 
Administration sought legislative support to continue the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program, and chose to do so by publicly disclosing the program in a 2006 speech by President 
Bush. The speech, which was based on CIA-provided information and vetted by the CIA, 
included numerous inaccurate representations about the CIA program and the effectiveness of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The CIA’s vetting of the speech is detailed in CIA 
“validation” documents, which include CIA concurrence and citations to records to support 
specific passages of the speech. For example, the CIA “Validation of Remarks” document 
includes the following: 

questioning the detainees in this program has given us information that 
has saved innocent lives by helping us to stop new attacks - here in the United 
States and across the world' 

CIA concurs with this assessment. Information from detainees prevented - 
among others - the West Coast airliner plot, a plot to blow up an apartment 



1155 The CIA attorney also described the Israeli precedent with regard to the “necessity defense” that had been 
invoked by CIA attorneys and the Department of Justice in 2001 and 2002. The CIA attorney wrote that the Israeli 
Supreme Court “also specifically considered the ‘ticking time bomb’ scenario and said that enhanced techniques 
could not be pre-approved for such situations, but that if worse came to worse, an officer who engaged in such 
activities could assert a common-law necessity defense, if he were ev er prosecuted.” ( See email from: 
[REDACTED]; to: John A. Rizzo; cc: [REDACTED], John A. Rizzo, \~ 

[REDACT ED]; sub ject: Re: M cCain; date: Decemb er 19, 2005, at 10:18:58 AM.) At the time, the CIA attorney and 
the former 



CTC Legal, | 



were working in the Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence. The OLC, in its July 20, 2007, memorandum, included an analysis of the Israeli court case in the 
context of concluding that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were “clearly authorized and justified by 
legislative authority” as a result of the Military Commissions Act. See memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting 
General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment 
Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the 
Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

1,56 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: John A. Rizzo; cc: [REDACTED], John A. Rizzo, HHfl 

iHH [REDACTED]; subject: Re: McCain; date: December 19, 2005, at 10:18:58 AM. 

III! I I III I I' '1 11111 1 

Page 197 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



building in the United States, a plot to attack various targets in the United 
Kingdom, and plots against targets in Karachi and the Arabian Gulf. These 
attacks would undoubtedly have killed thousands.” 1157 



Multiple iterations of the CIA “validation” documents reflect 
changes to the speech as it was being prepared. One week before the scheduled speech, a 
passage in the draft speech made inaccurate claims about the role played by Abu Zubaydah in the 
capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh and the role of Abu Zubaydah and Ramzi bin al-Shibh in the 
capture of KSM, but did not explicitly connect these claims to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. In an August 31, 2006, email exchange, CIA officers proposed the 
following language for the speech: 



“That same year, information from Zubaydah led the CIA to the trail of one of 
KSM’s accomplices, Ramzi bin al Shibh. Information from Zubaydah together 
with information from Shibh gave the CIA insight into al-Qa’ida’s 9/1 1 attack 
planning and th^mportanceofK With the knowledge that KSM was the 
‘mastermind,’ Pakistani partners planned and mounted an 

operation that resulted in his eventual capture and detention.” 1158 



The August 31, 2006, email exchange included citations to CIA 
cables to support the proposed passage; however, neither the cables, nor any other CIA records, 
support the assertions. 1159 



1157 Emphasis in original. CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy, Wednesday, 6 September 2006, Draft 
#15. As described in the relevant sections of this summary, and more extensively in Volume II, these claims were 
inaccurate. 

1158 Email from: 



|; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: 

|; subject: Source list for our AZ paragraphs; date: August 31, 2006, at 08:56 AM. 

1159 The cited cables describe Abu Zubaydah’s June 2002 description of a meeting with Ramzi bin al-Shibh 

(acquired prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah), and Abu 

Zubaydah’s August 200^reportin^iscussing the same meeting (after the use of the techniques). ( See CIA mf 
(101514Z JUN 02); August 2002).) Neither cable — or any other CIA record — indicates a 

connection between Abu Zubaydah’s reporting on his meeting with bin al-Shibh and bin al-Shibh’s capture. The 
cited cables also do not include information, which was available to the CIA prior to the capture of Abu Zubaydah, 
highlighting KSM’s “importance.” The cited cable describes Abu Zubaydah’s April 2002 reporting, prior to the use 
of the CIA’s enhancecUnterr^ techniques, identifying KSM as “Mukhtar” and the “mastermind” of the 9/1 1 
attacks. ( See April 2002).) The citations did not include cables referencing information 

available to the CIA about KSM that was obtained prior to the capture of Abu Zubaydah, including information on 
KSM’s alias “Mukhtar” and KSM’s role in the September 11, 2001, attacks, as is detailed elsewhere in this 
summary. The cables also did not support the claim that information provided by Abu Zubaydah or Ramzi bin al- 
Shibh led to the capture of KSM. One cited cable related to the identification by Ramzi bin al-Shibh, whilebin al- 
Shibh wa^r^oreigr^oveniment custody, of Ali Abdul Aziz Ali as “A mmar.” [The cable was cited as Hfl(| 
20700 As determined later, the actual cable was 20790.] As described elsewhere in 

this summary, KSM was not captured as a result of information related to Ammar al-Baluchi. The email exchange 
listed two cables directly related to the capture of KSM. The first cable, from approximately a week before KSM’s 
capture, described the CIA’s operational use a nd value of the asset who led the CIA to KSM. The cable stated that 
the relationshhUietwee^ the asset gained access to KSM, was “based 

on The cabl^tatecHhat CI^Headquarters 

“continues to be impressed with the evidence of [the asset’s] access to BMI^^BiKSM HH associates, I 




.) The second cable 

/NOFORN 



Page 198 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



Within a few days, the passage in the draft speech relating to the 
captures of Ramzi bin al-Shibh and KSM was modified to connect the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah to the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh. The 
updated draft now credited information from Abu Zubaydah and Ramzi bin al-Shibh with 
“help[ing] in the planning and execution of the operation that captured Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammed.” The updated draft speech stated: 

“Zubaydah [zoo-BAY-da] was questioned using these [interrogation] 
procedures, and he soon began to provide information on key al-Qaida 
operatives - including information that helped us find and capture more of 
those responsible for the attacks of Nine-Eleven. For example, Zubaydah 
[zoo-BAY-da] identified one of KSM’s accomplices in the Nine-Eleven 
attacks - a terrorist named Ramzi bin al Shibh [SHEEB]. The information 
Zubaydah [zoo-BAY-da] provided helped lead to the capture of bin al Shibh. 

And together these two terrorists provided information that helped in the 
planning and execution of the operation that captured Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammed.” 1160 



An updated CIA “validation” document concurring with the 
proposed passage provided a modified list of CIA cables as “sources” to support the passage. 
Cable citations to Abu Zubaydah’s reporting prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques were removed. 1161 Like the previous version, the CIA’s updated “validation” 
document did not cite to any cables demonstrating that information from Abu Zubaydah “helped 
lead to the capture of [Ramzi] bin al-Shibh.” 1162 Similarly, none of the cables cited to support 
the passage indicated that information from Abu Zubaydah and Ramzi bin al-Shibh (who was in 
foreign government custody when he provided the information cited by the CIA) “helped in the 



described KSM’s capture , stating that it was “ based on locational information” provided by the asset. (See 
| 41351 ) Neither of the two cables cited to support the claim made any 

reference to Abu Zubaydah, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, or any other detainee in CIA or foreign government custody. The 
capture of KSM, including the role of the asset (referred to herein as “ASSE T X”) is det ailed elsewhere in this 
summary and in greater detail in the full CominitteeStudy^^eeeinai^onu^^HJII; to: [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED]; cc: HHUHiHHH’ HflHHHH’ ^^HHBBfsubject: Source our AZ 

paragraphs; date: August 31, 2006, at 08:56 AM. 

ii6° p ronunc i a tion brackets in original draft. CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy, Wednesday, 6 
September 2006, Draft #15. 

1161 The document cited a cable on Abu Zubaydah’s August 2002 description of his meeting with Ramzi bin al- 
Shibh, but not the previously cited June 2002 cable related to Abu Zubaydah’s description of the same meeting , 
which was provided before Abu Zubaydah was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. See Hi 



1162 The information included in the cable describing Abu Zubaydah’s Augus t 2002 reporting on his meeting 
Ramzi bin al-Shibh was unrelated to the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh. ( See j 
The CIA document also citedasa^source”acabl^ the capture of bin al-Shibh with no mention of Abu 

Zubaydah’s reporting. (See The details of Ramzi bin al-Shibh’s capture are 

described elsewhere in this summary and i n greater detail in the full Committee Study. 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi mu i 



Page 199 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NOFORN 



planning and execution of the operation that captured [KSM].” 1163 As described elsewhere in 
this summary, there are no CIA records to support these claims. 1164 



The CIA documents validating the president’s speech addressed 
other passages that were likewise unsupported by the CIA’s cited cables. For example, the 
speech included an inaccurate claim regarding KSM that had been part of the CIA’s 
representations on the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques since 2003. 
The speech stated: 



“Once in our custody, KSM was questioned by the CIA using these 
procedures, and he soon provided information that helped us stop another 
planned attack on the United States. During questioning, KSM told us about 
another al Qaeda operative he knew was in CIA custody - a terrorist named 
Majid Khan. KSM revealed that [Majid] Khan had been told to deliver 
$50,000 to individuals working for a suspected terrorist leader named Hambali, 
the leader of al Qaeda’s Southeast Asian affiliate known as ‘J-I.’ CIA officers 
confronted Khan with this information. Khan confirmed that the money had 
been delivered to an operative named Zubair, and provided both a physical 
description and contact number for this operative. Based on that information, 
Zubair was captured in June of 2003, and he soon provided information that 
helped lead to the capture of Hambali.” 1165 



As support for this passage, the CIA cited a June 2003 cable 
describing a CIA interrogation of Majid Khan in which Majid Khan discussed Zubair. 1166 The 
CIA “validation” document did not include cable citations from March 2003 that would have 



revealed that Majid Khan provided this information while in foreign government custody, prior 
to the reporting from KSM. 1167 



1163 The CIA document included a previousl^itecU^able relatin^^hecaptureof KSM that made no mention of 

reporting from CIA detainees. (See 41351 M^HIHllllll^H) The CIA document also 

included the previously cited cable describing bin al-Shibh’s identification of “Ammar.” As described in the section 
of this summary, as well as in Volume II, on the Capture of KS M, KSM was not captured as a result of information 
relatedto Ammar al-Baluchi. (The document cited the cable as 20700, as noted, the actual cite was 

Hi^l 20790.) The CIA cable also cited an analytical product whose relevance was limited to the connection 
between KSM and al-Aziz (Ammar al-Baluchi). ( See DI Serial Flier CTC 2002-30086CH: CIA analytic report, 
“Threat Threads: Recent Advances in Understanding 1 1 September.”) Finally, the document included a cable that 
was unrelated to the content of the speech. 

1164 See sections of this summary and Volume II on the Capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh and the Capture of Khalid 
Shaykh Mohammad (KSM). 

1165 Presidential Speech on September 6, 2006, based on CIA information and vetted by CIA pe rsonnel. 

1166 CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy, Wednesday, 6 September 2006, Draft #15; 




(070724Z MAR 03), disseminated as Further, the June 2003 cable, 

DIRECTOR ifH (122120Z JUN 03), cited by the CIA as validation, makes no reference to reporting from KSM. 
Khan was captured on March 5, 2003 and was in foreign government detention until being transferred to CIA 
custody on May 2003. See details on t he detention and interrogation of Maji d Khan in Volume III. 

top 

Page 200 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



T -Q F SECRET // 



//NOF Q RN 



On September 6, 2006, President Bush deliveredthespeech based 
on the CIA-vetted in formation. 1168 On September 8, 2006, the chief of the 
Department in CTC, who had participated in the CIA’s validation of the 

speech, dis tributed the “final validation document” for possible updates or changes. In an email, 
|m urged the recipients to “[pjlease look very carefully, as this is going to be a very 
important document.” 1169 

On September 1 1, 2006, a CIA officer responded, questioning the 
passage in the speech related to the capture of KSM, as well as the relevance of the CIA cables 
cited in the validation document to support the passage. The CIA officer questioned whether a 
CIA cable describing Ramzi bin al-Shibh’s identification of “Ammar” supported the claim that 
bin al-Shibh’s reporting helped lead to the capture of KSM. The officer wrote: 

“I presume the information in this cable that supports the statement is Ramzi ’s 
admission regarding Ammar?? Did that actually help lead us to KSM?? not 
sure who did this section, but we may want to double-check this and provide 
additional cables on how this actually ‘assisted us’. This also seems to be a 
point critics in the press seem to be picking on. I will do some digging on my 
own as well.” 1170 



There are no CIA records to indicate that the CIA officer’s 
comments about the inadequate sourcing were further addressed. As described in this summary, 
and in more detail in Volume II, there are no CIA records to support the passage in the speech 
related to the capture of KSM. 

After the speech, press accounts challenging aspects of the speech 
became the subject of int ernal discussion a m on^om^CI^officers . On September 7, 2006, the 
chief of the HHHI Department in CTC, sent an email stating: “The 

NY Times has posted a story predictably poking holes in the President’s speech.” Defending the 
passage in the speech asserting that, after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 



1168 On April 29, 2009, Marc Thiessen, the speechwriter responsible for President Bush’s September 6, 2006, 
speech, wrote: “This was the most carefully vetted speech in presidential history - reviewed by all the key players 
from the individuals who ran the program all the way up to the director of national intelligence, who personally 
attested to the accuracy of the speech in a memo to the president. And just last week on Fox News, former CIA 
Director Michael Hayden said he went back and checked with the agency as to the accuracy of that speech and 
reported: ‘We stand by our story.”’ See Marc Thiessen, “The West Coast Plot: An ‘Inconvenient Truth,”’ The 
National Review , April 25, 2009. 

1169 Email from: 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 




, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|; subject: THE MOMENT YOU MAY HAVE BEEN WAITING FOR!!! Please verify the 
attached; date: September 8, 2006, at 06:28 PM. 



1170 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 





, [REDACTED], 



|, [REDACTED] [REDACTED], [REDACTED], | 

~ ^ subject: Re: THE MOMENT YOU MAY HAVE BEEN WAITING FOR! ! ! 
Please verify the Attached; date: September 1 1, 2006, at 9:16:15 AM; attachment Nl: CIA Validation of Remarks 
on Detainee Policy Final (Draft #15). The email also identified as unrelated one cable that had been cited as a 
source and corrected a transposed number of the cable describing Ramzi bin al-S hibh’s identification of “Ammar.” 

m i 1 1 iii i mm 

Page 201 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



fl NOFORN 



Abu Zubaydah provided information 
explained: 



“that helped lead to the capture of bin al-Shibh,” 




“...we knew Ramzi bin al-Shibh was involved in 9/11 before AZ was captured; 
however, AZ gave us information on his recent activities that — when added 
into other information — helped us track him. Again, on this point, we were 
very careful and the speech is accurate in what it says about bin al-Shibh.” Jm 

mm s statement, that Abu Zubaydah provided “information 
on [bin al-Shibh ’s] recent activities” that “helped [CIA] track him,” was nonsupported by the 
cables cited in the CIA’s “validation” document, or any other CIA record. HtlHI’s email 
did not address the other representation in the president’s speech — that Abu Zubaydah 
“identified” Ramzi bin al-Shibh. J 172 

The New York Times article also challenged the representation in 
the speech that Abu Zubaydah “disclosed” that KSM was the “mastermind behind the 9/1 1 
attacks and used the alias ‘Mukhtar,’” and that “[t]his was a vital piece of the puzzle that helped 
our intelligence community pursue KSM.” As the New York Times article noted, the 9/1 1 
Commissioned pointed to a cable from August 2001 that identified KSM as “Mukhtar.” In her 
email, acknowledged the August 2001 report identifying KSM as “Mukhtar” and 

provided additional information on the drafting of the speech: 

“[0]n 28 August, 2001, in fact, [CIA’s] HHHI [database] does show a report 
from [a source] stating that Mohammad Rahim’s brother Zadran told him that 
KSM was now being called ‘Mukhtar.’ Moreover, we were suspicious that 
KSM might have been behind 9/11 as early as 12 Sept 2001, and we had some 
reporting indicating he was the mastermind. We explained this latter fact to 
the White House, although the 28 August report escaped our notice.” 1173 




[REDACTED], 



1171 Email from: 

Mark Mansfield, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], | 

[REDACTED]; subject: Questions about Abu Zubaydah’s identification of KSM as “Mukhtar”; date: September 7, 
2006. A September 7, 2006, article (published September 8, 2006) in the New York Times, by Mark Mazzetti, 
entitled, “Questions Raised About Bush’s Primary Claims of Secret Detention System” included comments by CIA 
officials defending the assertions in the President’s speech. The article stated: “Mr. Bush described the 
interrogation techniques used on the C.I.A. prisoners as having been ‘safe, lawful and effective,’ and he asserted that 
torture had not been used. . . .Mr. Bush also said it was the interrogation of Mr. Zubaydah that identified Mr. bin al- 
Shibh as an accomplice in the Sept. 11 attacks. American officials had identified Mr. bin al-Shibh’s role in the 
attacks months before Mr. Zubaydah’s capture.” 

1,72 There are no CIA records to support these claims. See the section of this summary on the capture of Ramzi bin 
al-Shibh, as well as a m ore det ailed account in Volume II. 

1173 Email from: 




Mark Mansfield, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED]; subject: Questions about Abu Zubaydah’s identification of KSM as “Mukhtar”; date: September 7, 
2006. There are no CIA records indicating what was “explained” to the White House. The CIA validation 
document provided officially concurred with the p assage in the speech. See CIA Val idation of Remarks on Detainee 
Policy, Wednesday, 6 September 2006, Draft #15; 

flNOFORN 

Page 202 of 499 



T O P SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



In her email, stated that “[t]he fact that the 9/1 1 

commission, with 20-20 hindsight, thinks we should have known this in August 2001 does not 
alter the fact that we didn’t.” 1 174 

In addition to the New York Times article, the CIA was concerned 
about an article by Ron Suskind in Time Magazine that also challenged the assertions in the 
speech about thecapturcsof Ramzi bin al-Shibh amnCSM^^r^September 11, 2006, email, 
the chief of the IHHI Department in CTC, wrote: “[w]e are not 

claiming [Abu Zubaydah] provided exact locatio nal informa tion, merely that he provided us with 
information that helped in our targeting efforts.” email did not address the 

representations in the president’s speech that Abu Zubaydah “identified” Ramzi bin al-Shibh and 
that the information from Abu Zubaydah “helped lead to the capture” of bin al-Shibh. With 
regard to the capture of KSM, ema ^ acknowledged that Suskind’ s assertion that 

“the key was a cooperative source” was “correct as far as it goes, but the priority with which we 
pursued KS M changed once AZ conclusively identified him as the mastermind of 9/1 l.” 1176 
mmm email did not address the representation in the president’s speech that Abu 
Zubaydah, along with Ramzi bin al-Shibh, “helped in di^lanning and execution of the 
operation that captured Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.” s statements about the captures 

of Ramzi bin al-Shibh and KSM are not supported by CIA records. 1177 

The president’s September 6, 2006, speech, which was based on 
CIA-provided information and vetted by the CIA, was the first detailed, formal public 
representation about the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1 ' 8 The 



1174 Email from: 




, [REDACTED], 



Mark Mansfield, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], | 

[REDACTED]; subject: Questions about Abu Zubaydah’s identification of KSM as “Mukhtar”; date: September 7, 
2006. 

1175 The Unofficial Story of the al-Qaeda 14; Their torture by the CIA was wrong - in more ways than you might 
think, Ron Suskind, Time, 18 September 2006. 



1 176 Email from: 



I; to: [REDACTED], | 



I, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: URGENT: FOR YOUR COMMENT: DCIA Questions on 
the Suskind Article; date: September 11, 2006, at 08:23 PM. 

1177 See the section of this summary and Volume 11 on the Capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh and the Capture of Khalid 
Shaykh Mohammad (KSM). In 2007, CIA officers also questioned the passage in the President’s September 6, 
2006, speech concerning the disruption of plotting against Camp Lemonier in Djibouti. See the section of this 
summary and Volume II on the Thwarting of the Camp Lemonier Plotting for additional information. 

1,78 President Bush made other public statements that relied on inaccurate information provided by the CIA. For 
example, as described elsewhere in this summary, on March 8, 2008, President Bush vetoed legislation that would 
have limited interrogations to techniques authorized by the Army Field Manual. The President’s veto message to 
the House of Representatives stated that “[t]he CIA’s ability to conduct a separate and specialized interrogation 
program for terrorists who possess the most critical information in the war on terror has helped the United States 
prevent a number of attacks, including plots to fly passenger airplanes into the Library Tower in Los Angeles and 
into Heathrow Airport or buildings in downtown London.” (See message to the House of Representatives, President 
George W. Bush, March 8, 2008). The President also explained his veto in his weekly radio address, in which he 
referenced the “Library Tower,” also known as the “Second Wave” plot, and the Heathrow plot, while representing 
that the CIA program “helped us stop a plot to strike a U.S. Marine camp in Djibouti, a planned attack on the U.S. 
consulate in Karachi...” (See President’s Radio Address, President George W. Bush, March 8, 2008). As detailed 
in this summary, and described more fully ir^olum^I^I^epresentation^egarding the role of the CIA’s 

TOP SECRE T//B^^^j|M^^M^NOFORN 

Page 203 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 




inaccurate representations in the speech have been repeated in numerous articles, books, and 
broadcasts. The speech was also relied upon by the OLC in its July 20, 2007, memorandum on 
the legality of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, specifically to support the premise 
that the use of the techniques was effective in “producing substantial quantities of otherwise 
unavailable intelligence.” 1179 

D. CIA Representations About the Effectiveness of Its Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 
Against Specific CIA Detainees 

While the CIA made numerous general representations about the 
effectiveness of its enhanced interrogation techniques, CIA representations on specific detainees 
focused almost exclusively on two CIA detainees, Abu Zubaydah, detained on March 28, 2002, 
and KSM, detained on March 1, 2003. 1180 

I. Abu Zubaydah 

As described in greater detail in the full Committee Study, the CIA 
provided significant information to policymakers and the Department of Justice on the CIA’s 
decision to use the newly developed CIA “enhanced interrogation techniques” on Abu Zubaydah 
and the effects of doing so. These representations were provided by the CIA to the CIA OIG, 1181 



enhanced interrogation techniques with regard to the Second Wave, Heathrow, Djibouti and Karachi plots were 
inaccurate. 

1179 The OLC memorandum, along with other OLC memoranda relying on inaccurate CIA representations, has been 
declassified, as has the May 2004 OIG Special Review containing inaccurate information provided by CIA officers. 
Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, 
Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War 
Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 14). 

1180 See Volume II for additional information on CIA representations. 

1181 Among other documents, see Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for 
Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program” (2003-7 123-IG); date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of 



CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities 



Page 204 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 




the White House, 1182 the Department of Justice, 1183 Congress, 1184 and the American public. 1185 
The representations include that: (1) Abu Zubaydah told the CIA he believed “the general US 
population was ‘weak,’ lacked resilience, and would be unable to ‘do what was necessary”; 1186 
(2) Abu Zubaydah stopped cooperating with U.S. government personnel using traditional 
interrogation techniques; 1187 (3) Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation team believed the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques would result in critical information on terrorist 
operatives and plotting; 1188 and (4) the use of CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu 
Zubaydah was effective in eliciting critical intelligence from Abu Zubaydah. 1189 These 
representations are not supported by internal CIA records. 

The CIA representation that Abu Zubaydah “expressed [his] belief 
that the general US population was ‘weak,’ lacked resilience, and would be unable to ‘do what 
was necessary’ to prevent the terrorists from succeeding in their goals” is not supported by CIA 



1182 Among other documents, see Memorandum for the Record: “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 

2003.” Memorandum prepared by CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003, and briefing slides 
entitled, “C/A Interrogation Program, ” dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials; and Briefing 
for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program, CIA document dated March 4, 2005, entitled, 
“Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program.” ^ 

1183 Among other documents, see March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from flH 

Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center re: Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques. 
1,84 Among other documents, see CIA classified statement for the record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 
provided by General Michael V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007; and accompanying 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing transcript for April 12, 2007, entitled, “Hearing on Central 
Intelligence Agency Detention and Interrogation Program.” Director Hayden stated: “Now in June [2002], after 
about four months of interrogation, Abu Zubaydah reached a point where he refused to cooperate and he shut down. 
He would not talk at all to the FBI interrogators and although he was still talking to CIA interrogators no significant 
progress was being made in learning anything of intelligence value.” 

1185 For example, see CIA “Questions and Proposed Answers” 9/2/2006, Tab 2 of CIA Validation of Remarks on 
Detainee Policy, September 6, 2006. 

1186 See, for example, March 2, 2005, CIA memorandum for Steve Bradbury from HI Legal 

Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 

1187 See, for example, ODNI September 2006 Unclassified Public Release: “During initial interrogation, Abu 
Zubaydah gave some information that he probably viewed as nominal. Some was important, however, including 
that Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM) was the 9/1 1 mastermind and used the moniker ‘Mukhtar.’ This 
identification allowed us to comb previously collected intelligence for both names, opening up new leads to this 
terrorist plotter — leads that eventually resulted in his capture. It was clear to his interrogators that Abu Zubaydah 
possessed a great deal of information about al-Qa’ida; however, he soon stopped all cooperation. Over the ensuing 
months, the CIA designed a new interrogation program that would be safe, effective, and legal.” See also 
Presidential Speech on Septem ber 6, 20 06, based on CIA information and vetted by CIA personnel. 

1,88 As detailed in DIRECTOR HH| (031357Z AUG 02). See also Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum for 
John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency, dated August 1, 2002, and entitled 
“Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative,” which states: “The interrogation team is certain [Abu Zubaydah] has 
additional information that he refuses to divulge. Specifically, he is withholding information regarding terrorist 
networks in the United States or in Saudi Arabia and information regarding plans to conduct attacks within the 
United States or against our interests overseas.” 

1189 Among other documents, see Office of the Director of National Intelligence, “Summary of the High Value 
Terrorist Detainee Program," Septe mber 6, 2006; and CIA M emorandum for Steve Bradbury at the Department of 
Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from HIHIHH’ H Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject 
“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 




Page 205 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



records. 1190 On August 30, 2006, a CIA officer from the CIA’s al-Qa’ida Plans and Organization 
Group wrote: “we have no records that ‘he declared that America was weak, and lacking in 
resilience and that our society did not have the will to ‘do what was necessary’ to prevent the 
terrorists from succeeding in their goals.’” 1191 In a CIA Sametime communication that same day, 
a CIA ALEC Station officer wrote, “I can find no reference to AZ being deifant [sic] and 
declaring America weak. . . in fact everything I ha ve read indic ated he used a non dc ifiant [s ic] 
resistance strategy.” In response, the chief of the Department in CTC, IHHH 

mmm wrote: “I’ve certainly heard that said of AZ for years, but don’t know why....” The 
CI^ALE^Station officeo^plied^probably a combo of [deputy chief of AL EC Station, 
■MHi and [HHHB-* I’ll leave it at that.” The chief of the 
Department completed the exchange, writing “yes, believe so... and agree, we shall pass over in 
silence.” 1192 



The CIA representation that Abu Zubaydah stopped cooperating 
with debriefers using traditional interrogation techniques is also not supported by CIA 
records. 1193 In early June 2002, Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogators recommended th at Abu Zubaydah 
spend several weeks in isolation while the interrogation team members traveled |^H “as a 
means of keeping [Abu Zubayda h] off-balan ce and to allow the team needed time off for a break 
and to attencU(M3er^onal matters as well as to discuss “the endgame” for Abu 

Zubaydah with officers from CIA Headquarters. 1194 As a result, Abu Zubaydah spent 

much of June 2002, and all of July 2002, 47 days in total, in isolation. When CIA officers next 
interrogated Abu Zubaydah, they immediately used the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
including the waterboard. 1195 Prior to this isolation period, Abu Zubaydah provided information 
on al-Qa’ida activities, plans, capabilities, and relationships, in addition to information on its 
leadership structure, including personalities, decision-making processes, training, and tactics. 1196 
Abu Zubaydah provided the same type of information prior to, during, and after the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1197 Abu Zubaydah’s inability to provide information 



1190 See, for example, March 2, 2005, CIA memorandum for Steve Bradbury from 
Group, DCI Counterterrorist Ce nter, “Effectivenes s of the CIA Cou ntert errorist Interrogation Tech niques.” 

|; subject: 



Legal 



1191 Email from: 

“Suggested language change forAZ^datejAugust 30, 2006, at 06:32 PM. 

1192 Sametime communication, and I 



30/Aug/06 13:15:23 to 19:31:47. 

1193 See ODNI September 2006 Unclassified Public Release: “During initial interrogation, Abu Zubaydah gave some 
information that he probably viewed as nominal. Some was important, however, including that Khalid Shaykh 
Mohammad (KSM) was the 9/1 1 mastermind and used the moniker ‘Mukhtar.’ This identification allowed us to 
comb previously collected intelligence for both names, opening up new leads to this terrorist plotter — leads that 
eventually resulted in his capture. It was clear to his interrogators that Abu Zubaydah possessed a great deal of 
information about al-Qa’ida; however, he soon stopped all cooperation. Over the ensuing months, the CIA designed 
a new interrogation program that would be safe, effective, and legal.” See also Presidential Speech on September 6, 
2006, based on CIA information and vetted by CIA personnel, that states: “We knew that Zubaydah had more 
information that could save innocent lives. But he stopped talking... And so, the CIA used an alternative set of 
pro cedures.” 

1,94 10424 (070814Z JUN 02) 

1195 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III, to include CIA email [REDACTED] dated March 28, 2007, 
04:42 PM, with the subject line, “Subject detainee allegation - per our telcon of today.” 

1196 See reporting charts in Abu Zubaydah detainee review, as well as CIA paper entitled “Abu Zubaydah” and dated 
March 2005. The same information was included in an “Abu Zubaydah Bio” document “Prepared on 9 August 
2006.” 

1197 See reporting charts in the Abu Zubay dah detainee review in Volume III. 

i nr 'ii i ii i' i i ii ii i iii i i 

Page 206 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



on the next attack in the United States — and operatives in the United States — provided the basis 
for CIA representations that Abu Zubaydah was “uncooperative,” as well as for the CIA’s 
determination that Abu Zubaydah required the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques to become “compliant” and reveal the information that CIA Headquarters believed he 
was withholding. The CIA further stated that Abu Zubaydah could stop the application of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, like the waterboard, by providing the names of 
operatives in the United States or information to stop the next attack. 1198 At no point during or 
after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques did Abu Zubaydah provide this type 
of information. 1199 

The CIA representation that Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogation team 
believed the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques would result in new information 
on operatives in the United States and terrorist plotting is also incongruent with CIA records. 
While Abu Zubaydah was in isolation in July 2002, CIA Headquarters informed the Department 
of Justice and White House officials that Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogation team believed Abu 
Zubaydah possessed information on terrorist threats to, and al-Qa’ida operatives in, the United 
States. 1200 The CIA officials further represented that the interrogation team had concluded that 
the use of more aggressive methods “is required to persuade Abu Zubaydah to provide the 
critical information needed to safeguard the lives of innumerable innocent men, women, and 
children within the United States and abroad,” and warned “countless more Americans may die 
unless we can persuade AZ to tell us what he knows.” 1201 However, according to CIA cables, the 
interrogation team at the detention site had not determined that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques were required for Abu Zubaydah to provide such threat information. Rather, the 
interrogation team wrote “[o]ur assumption is the objective of this operation is to achieve a high 
degree of confidence that [Abu Zubaydah] is not holding back actionable information concerning 
threats to the United States beyond that which [Abu Zubaydah] has already provided.” 1202 

The CIA representation that the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques on Abu Zubaydah was effective in producing critical threat information 



1198 See 10586 (041559Z AUG 02), which states: “In truth, [Zubaydah] can halt the proceedings at any 

time by providing truthful revelations on the threat which may save countless lives.” 

1199 See Abu Zubaydah detaine e review in Volume III. 

1200 As detailed in DIRECTOR (031357Z AUG 02). The CIA further represented: (1) that the enhanced 

interrogation phase of Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation would likely last “no more than several days but could last up 
to thirty days,” (2) “that the use of the [enhanced interrogation techniques] would be on an as-needed basis and that 
not all of these techniques will necessarily be used,” (3) that the CIA expected “these techniques to be used in some 
sort of escalating fashion, culminating with the waterboard, though not necessarily ending with this technique,” (4) 
“that although some of these techniques may be used more than once, that repetition will not be substantial because 
the techniques generally lose their effectiveness after several repetitions,” and (5) “that steps will be taken to ensure 
that [Abu Zubaydah’s] injury is not in any way exacerbated by the use of these methods.” See the Abu Zubaydah 
detainee review for detailed information for how these statements proved almost entirely inaccurate. See also 
Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney Genera l, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative. 

1201 DIRECTOR ■■ (03 1 357Z AUG 02) 

1202 [REDACTED] 7 3208 (231043Z JUL 02); email from: to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

and subject: Addendum from [DETENTION SITE GREEN]; date: July 23, 2002, at 07:56:49 PM; 

[REDACTED] 73208 (231043Z JUL 02). Additional assessments by the interrogation team that Abu Zubaydah was 
not withholding information are described in the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume 111. 




Page 207 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



#N Q F Q RN 



on terrorists and terrorist plotting against the United States is also not supported by CIA records. 
Abu Zubaydah did not provide the information for which the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques were justified and approved — information on the next attack and operatives in the 
United States. 1203 According to CIA records, Abu Zubaydah provided information on “al-Qa’ida 
activities, plans, capabilities, and relationships,” in addition to information on “its leadership 
structure, including personalities, decision-making processes, training, and tactics.” 1204 This type 
of information was provided by Abu Zubaydah prior to, during, and after the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 1205 At no point during or after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques did Abu Zubaydah provide information on al-Qa’ida cells in the United 
States or operational plans for terrorist attacks against the United States. 1206 Further, a 
quantitative review of Abu Zubaydah’ s intelligence reporting indicates that more intelligence 
reports were disseminated from Abu Zubaydah’ s first two months of interrogation, before the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and when FBI special agents were directly 
participating, than were derived during the next two-month phase of interrogations, which 
included the non-stop use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 24 hours a day for 17 
days. 1207 Nonetheless, on August 30, 2002, the CIA informed the National Security Council that 



1203 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III. Participants in the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah also wrote 
that Abu Zubaydah “probably reached the point of cooperation even prior to the August institution of ‘enhanced’ 
measures -a development missed because of the narrow focus of the questioning. In any event there was no 
evidence that the waterboard produced time-perishabl e informa tion which otherwise would have been 
unobtainable.” See CIA Summary and Reflections of H^HMedical Services on OMS participation in the RDI 
program. 

1204 cja paper entitled “Abu Zubaydah” and dated March 2005. See also “Abu Zubaydah Bio” document “Prepared 
on 9 August 2006.” 

1205 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III, and CIA paper entitled, “Abu Zubaydah,” dated March 2005; 
as well as “Abu Zubaydah Bio” document “Prepared on 9 August 2006.” 

1206 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III. 

1207 Abu Zubaydah was taken into CIA custody on March |, 2002, and was shortly thereafter hospitalized until 

April 15, 2002. Abu Zubaydah returned to DETENTION SITE GREEN on April 15, 2002. During the months of 
April and May 2002, which included a period during which Abu Zubaydah was on life support and unable to speak 
(Abu Zubaydah communicated primarily with FBI special agents in writing), Abu Zubaydah’s interrogations 
resulted in 95 intelligence reports. In February 2008, the CIA identified the “key intelligence and reporting derived” 
from Abu Zubaydah. The three items identified by the CIA were all acquired in April and May of 2002 by FBI 
interrogators. Abu Zubaydah was placed in isolation from June 18, 2002, to August 4, 2002, without being asked 
any questions. After 47 days in isolation, the CIA reinstituted contact with Abu Zubaydah at approximately 11:50 
AM on August 4, 2002, when CIA personnel entered the cell, shackled and hooded Abu Zubaydah, and removed his 
towel, leaving Abu Zubaydah naked. Without asking any questions, CIA personnel made a collar around his neck 
with a towel and used the collar “to slam him against a concrete wall.” Multiple enhanced interrogation techniques 
were used non-stop until 6:30 PM, when Abu Zubaydah was strapped to the waterboard and subjected to the 
waterboard technique “numerous times” between 6:45 PM and 8:52 PM. The “aggressive phase of interrogation” 
using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques continued for 20 days. ( See Abu Zubaydah treatment chronology 
in Volume III.) During the months of August and September 2002, Abu Zubaydah’s reporting resulted in 91 
intelligence reports, four fewer than the first two months of his CIA detention. ( See Abu Zubaydah detainee review 
in Volume III.) Specifically, for information on Abu Zubaydah’s initial walling, see CIA email dated March 28, 
2007, at 04:42 PM, with the subject line, “Subject detainee allegation - per our telcon of today,” which states that 
Abu Zubaydah claims “a collar was used to slam him against a concrete wall.” The CIA officer wrote, “While we 
do not have a record that this occurred, one interrogator at the site at the time confirmed that this did indeed happen. 
For the record, a plywood ‘wall’ was immediately constructed at the site after the walling on the concrete wall.” 
Regarding the CIA’s assessment of the “key intelligence” from Abu Zubaydah, see CIA briefing documents for 
Leon Panetta entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key 
Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abr^ubaydal^^ (KSM)” (includes “DCIA 

II l<! I )H hi n 

Page 208 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/^ 



//NOF O R N 



the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were effective and “producing meaningful 
results.” 1208 Shortly thereafter, however, in October 2002, CIA records indicate that President 
Bush was informed in a Presidential Daily Brief (PDB) that “Abu Zubaydah resisted providing 
useful information until becoming more cooperative in early August, probably in the hope of 
improving his living conditions.” The PDB made no reference to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 1209 Subsequently, the CIA represented to other senior policymakers 
and the Department of Justice that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were 
successfully used to elicit critical information from Abu Zubaydah. 1210 For example, in a March 
2, 2005, CIA memorandum to the Department of Justice, the CIA represented that information 
obtained from Abu Zubaydah on the “Dirty Bomb Plot” and Jose Padilla was acquired only 
“after applying [enhanced] interrogation techniques.” 1211 This CIA representation was repeated 
in numerous CIA communications with policymakers and the Department of Justice. 1212 The 
information provided by the CIA was inaccurate. On the evening of April 20, 2002, prior to the 



Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “ElTs and Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key 
Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM) ,” “Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: 
Attachment,” and “supportingrefere^ to include^Backgroun^n Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”). 

1208 On August 30, 2002, IHfeUCTC Legal, IHIHtHH* met witl1 NSC Legal Adviser John Bellinger 

to discuss Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogation. (See email from: John Rizzo;to^ohn Moseman; subject: Meeting with 
NSC Legal A dviser, 30 August 2002; date: September 3, 2002; ALEC 052227Z SEP 02.) According to 

|’s email documenting the meeting, he “noted that we had employed the walling techniques, 
confinement box, waterboard, along with some of the other methods which also had been approved by the Attorney 
General,” and “reported that while the experts at the site and at Headquarters were still assessing the product of the 
recent sessions, it did appeal’ that the current phase was producing meaningful results.” (See email from: John 
Rizzo; to: John Moseman; subject: Meeting with NSC Legal Adviser, 30 August 2002; date: September 3, 2002.) 
The email did not provide any additional detail on what was described to Bellinger with respect to either the use of 
the techniques or the “results” of the interrogation. It is unclear from CIA records whether the CIA ever informed 
the NSC legal adviser or anyone else at the NSC or the Department of Justice that Abu Zubaydah failed to provide 
information about future attacks against the United States or operatives tasked to commit attacks in the U.S., during 
or after the use of t he CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

1209 ALEC ■■ (181439Z OCT 02) 

1210 These representations were eventually included in the President’s September 6, 2006, speech, in which the 
President stated: “We knew that Zubaydah had more information that could save innocent lives, but he stopped 
talking... so the CIA used an alternative set of procedures... Zubaydah was questioned using these procedures, and 
soon he began to provide information on key al Qaeda operatives, including information that helped us find and 
capture more of those responsible for the attacks on September the 1 l lh .” These representations were also made to 
the Committee. On September 6, 2006, Director Hayden testified that, “faced with the techniques and with the 
prospects of what he did not know was coming, Abu Zubaydah decided that he had earned the burden as far as 
Allah had required him to carry it and that he could put the burden down and cooperate with his interrogators.” (See 
transcript of briefing, September 6, 2006 (DTS #2007-1336).) Director Hayden’s Statement for the Record for an 
April 12, 2007, hearing stated that: “[a]fter the use of these techniques, Abu Zubaydah became one of our most 
important sources of intelligence on al-Qa’ida.” See statement for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence from 
CIA Director Hayden, for April 12, 2007, hearing (DTS #2007-1563). 

12,1 Italics in original document. CI A Memorandum for Stev e Bradbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 
Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from HI Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject 

“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 

1212 Among other documents, see Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memoranda dated May 30, 2005, 
and July 20, 2007. The July 20, 2007, memorandum - now declassified - states (inaccurately) that: “Interrogations 
of Zubaydah — again, once enhanced techniques were employed — revealed two al Qaeda operatives already in the 
United States and planning to destroy a high rise apartment building and to detonate a radiological bomb in 
Washington, D.C.” See Volume II, specifically the section on the “Thwarting of the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings 
Plot” and the capture of Jose Padilla, for a dditional details concerning the inaccu racies of this statement. 

mi iii iii i iiii'i 
Page 209 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, Abu Zubaydah provided this information to 
FBI officers who were using rapport building interrogation techniques. 1213 

2. Khalid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM) 

As described in more detail in the full Committee Study, the CIA 
provided significant inaccurate information to policymakers on the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques in the interrogation of KSM. These representations were 



1213 



1 009 1 (210959Z APR 02). Despite requests by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, the 
CIA has never corrected the record on this assertion. On September 8, 2008, the Committee submitted Questions for 
the Record (QFRs) to the CIA from a hearing on the legal opinions issued by the Department of Justice’s Office of 
Legal Counsel on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. Because of time constraints, the CIA agreed “to 
take back several questions from Members that [the CIA was] unable to answer at the hearing.” On the topic of the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the Committee asked “Why was this information 
[related to Padilla], which was not obtained through the use of EITs, included in the ‘Effectiveness Memo?”’ CIA 
records provided for thisujeview contain coinpletedresponses to these Questions for the Record. The CIA’s answer 
to this question was: “[H^HCTC Legal simply inadvertently reporteddiis wrong. Abu 

Zubaydah provided information on Jose Padilla while being interrogated by the FBI (HHH1 10091).” The 
Committee never received this response, despite numerous requests. Instead, the CIA responded with a letter dated 
October 17, 2008, stating that the “CIA has responded to numerous written requests for information from SSCI on 
this topic [the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program],” and that “[w]e are available to provide additional 
briefings on this issue to Members as necessary.” In a letter to CIA Director Michael Hayden, Chairman 
Rockefeller wrote, “[t]he CIA’s refusal to respond to hearing Questions for the Record is unprecedented and is 
simply unacceptable.” Senator Feinstein wrote a separate letter to CIA Director Michael Hayden stating, “I want 
you to know that I found the October 17, 2008 reply... appalling.” The CIA did not respond. ( See : (1) Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence Questions for the Record submitted to CIA Director Michael Hayden on September 8, 
2008, with a request for a response by October 10, 2008 (DTS #2008-3522); (2) CIA document prepared in 
response to “Questions for the Record” submitted by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on September 8, 
2008; (3) letter from Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairman John D. Rockefeller IV, dated October 29, 
2008, to CIA Director Michael Hayden (DTS #2008-4217); (4) letter from Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
Chairman John D. Rockefeller IV, dated October 29, 2008, to CIA Director Michael Hayden (DTS #2008-4217); 
and (5) letter from Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Committee member, Dianne Feinstein, dated October 
30, 2008, to CIA Director Michael Hayden (DTS #2008-4235).) In February 2004, a senior CIA officer wrote: “AZ 
never really gave ‘this is the plot’ type of information. He claimed every plot/operation he had knowledge of and/or 
was working on was only preliminary. (Padilla and the dirty bomb plot was p rio r to enhanced and he never really 
gave actionable to get them).” See email from: cc: 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTBDL^^BMiiiHjoh^ 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]7||iHBiH subject: Please 
Read - Re CTC Response to the Draft IG Reporhdate^ 

ini 'll! III I IM HIM 

Page 210 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



provided by the CIA to the OIG, 1214 the White House, 1215 the Department of Justice, 1216 the 
Congress, 1217 and the American public. 1218 The representations include that: (1) KSM provided 
little threat information or actionable intelligence prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques; 1219 (2) the CIA overcame KSM’s resistance through the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques; 1220 (3) the CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique 
was particularly effective in eliciting information from KSM; 1221 (4) KSM “recanted little of the 
information” he had provided, and KSM’s information was “generally accurate” and 
“consistent”; 1222 (5) KSM made a statement to CIA personnel — “soon, you will know” — 
indicating an attack was imminent upon his arrest; and (6) KSM believed “the general US 



12,4 Among other documents, see Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for 
Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program” (2003-71 23 -IG); date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of 
CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

1215 Among other documents, see Memorandum for the Record: “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 
2003,” Memorandum prepared by CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003, and briefing slides 
entitled, “CM Interrogation Program, ” dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials; Briefing for 
Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program. CIA document dated March 4, 2005, entitled, 
“Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program,” and “DCIA Talking Points: 
Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, with the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 
6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 

12,6 Among other documents, see March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from 

Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center re: Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques. 

1217 Among other documents, see CIA classified Statement for the Record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 
provided by General Michael V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007; and accompanying 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing transcript for April 12, 2007, entitled, “Hearing on Central 
Intelligence Agency Detention and Interrogation Program.” 

1218 See , for example, CIA “Questions and Proposed Answers” (related to the President’s speech) 9/2/2006; Tab 2 of 
CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy, September 6, 2006; and speech by President Bush on September 6, 
2006. 

1219 CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence, ’^ubiech 

“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Inte^ogationTech^ues,” included in email from: to: 

mm, and subject: on value 

techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. CIA document dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for 
Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program.” CIA Talking Points entitled, “Talking Points 
for 10 March 2005 DCI Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques.” 
CIA briefing document dated May 2, 2006, entitled, “BRIEFING FOR CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE PRESIDENT 2 
May 2006 Briefing for Chief of Staff to the President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, De tention and Interrogation 
Programs.” March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from mi^H’ 1^1 Legal Group, DCI 
Counterterrorist Center re: Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques. 

1220 CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence, ’^ubiect: 

“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterror ist InterrogatiorCTechi^ues,’’ included in email from: to: 

and subject: on value 

techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM; CIA document dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for 
Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program.” CIA briefing document dated May 2, 2006, 
entitled, “BRIEFING FOR CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE PRESIDENT 2 May 2006 Briefing for Chief of Staff to the 
President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Programs.” 

1221 See, for example, transcript, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

1222 “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent Source On Al-Qa’ida,” authored by [REDACTED], 
CTC/UBLD/AQPO/AQLB; CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team- “Renditions, Detentions, and 
Interrogations (RDI)” including “Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009,” referenced 
materials attached to cover memorandum with the title, “D/CIA Conference Room Seating Visit by President-elect 
Barrack [sic] Obama National Security TeanfTuesday^^anuar^009^3^- 11:30 a.m.” 

TOP 

Page 211 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ / NOFORN 



population was ‘weak,’ lacked resilience, and would be unable to ‘do what was necessary.” 1223 
These representations are not supported by internal CIA records. 

While the CIA represented to multiple parties that KSM provided 
little threat information or actionable intelligence prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, CIA records indicate that KSM was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques within “a few minutes” of first being questioned by CIA 
interrogators. 1224 This material fact was omitted from CIA representations. 

The CIA represented that the CIA overcame KSM’s resistance to 
interrogation by using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1225 CIA records do not 
support this statement. To the contrary, there are multiple CIA records describing the 
ineffectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in gaining KSM’s cooperation. 
On March 26, 2003, the day after the CIA last used its enhanced interrogation techniques on 
KSM, KSM was described as likely lying and engaged in an effort “to renew a possible 
resistance stance.” 1226 On April 2, 2003, the Interagency Intelligence Committee on Terrorism 
(IICT) produced an assessment of KSM’s intelligence entitled, “Precious Truths, Surrounded by 
a Bodyguard of Lies.” The assessment concluded that KSM was withholding information or 
lying about terrorist plots and operatives targeting the United States. 1227 During and after the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the CIA repeatedly expressed concern that KSM 
was lying and withholding information in the context of CBRN (Chemical, Biological, 
Radiological, and Nuclear) programs, 1228 plotting against U.S. interests in Karachi, Pakistan, 1229 
plotting against Heathrow Airport, 1230 Abu Issa al-Britani, 1231 as well as the “Second Wave” 
plotting against the “tallest building in California,” which prompted the CIA’s ALEC Station to 
note in a cable dated April 22, 2003, that it “remain[e]d concerned that KSM’s progression 
towards full debriefing status is not yet apparent where it counts most, in relation to threats to US 
interests, especially inside CONUS.” 1232 



Legal Group, DCI 



1224 

1225 



1223 March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from | 

Counterterrorist Center re: Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques. 

3449 1 (05 1 400Z M AR 03 ) 

CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence ,” Subject: 
“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterror ist In terrogation Te chniques,” included in email from: 

ttHHHi, and 



; subject: “paper on value of interrogation 
techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. CIA document dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for 
Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program.” CIA briefing document dated May 2, 2006, 
entitled, “BRIEFING FOR CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE PRESIDENT 2 May 2006 Briefing for Chief of Staff to the 
Pre sident Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Programs.” 

1226 11026 ( 27 1034Z MAR 03) 

1227 “KJbalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” 
Interagency Intel ligence Committee on Terrorism (IICT), April 3, 2003. 

(121550Z JUN 03) 

(02 20 12Z MAY 03 ) 
i23° Memorandum for: 

Action detainee branch; date: 12 June 2003. 



1228 DIRECTOR 

1229 ALEC 



; subject: 



ALEC 




(210159Z OCT 03); email from: 



subject: KSM and Khallad Issues; date: October 16, 2003, at 5:25:13 PM. 



1232 



ALEC (222153Z APR 03) 

TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 212 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T 



//NOFORN 



The CIA repeatedly represented that the CIA’s waterboard 
interrogation technique was particularly effective in eliciting information from KSM. 1233 This 
representation is not supported by CIA records. Numerous CIA personnel, including members 
of KSM’s interrogation team, expressed their belief that the waterboard interrogation technique 
was ineffective on KSM. The on-site medical officer told the inspector general that after three or 
four days it became apparent that the waterboard was ineffective and that KSM “hated it b ut 
knew he c ould manage.” 1234 KSM debriefer and Deputy Chief of ALEC Station HHH 
| KHH th e inspector general that KSM “figured out a way to deal with [the 

waterboard],” 1235 and she relayed in a 2005 Sametime communication that “we broke KSM. .. 
using the Majid Khan stuff... and th^mails^Mn other words b^onfrontin^CSM with 
information from other sources. 1236 ^^^^^^|CTC Legal, told the 

inspector general that the waterboard “was of limited use on KSM.” 1237 A KSM interrogator told 
the inspector general that KSM had “beat the system,” 1238 and assessed that KSM responded to 
“creature comforts and sense of importance” and not to “confrontational” approaches. 1239 The 
interrogator later wrote in a Sametime communication that KSM and Abu Zubaydah “held back” 
despite the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, adding “I’m ostracized whenever 
I suggest th ose two did n ot tell us everything. How dare I think KSM was holding back.” 1240 In 
April 2003, ^^^^^|OMS told the inspector general that the waterboard had “not been very 
effective on KSM.” He also “questioned how the repeated use of the waterboard was 
categorically different from ‘beating the bottom of my feet,’ or from torture in general.” 1241 

The CIA repeatedly represented that KSM had “recanted little of 
the information” he had provided, and that KSM’s information was “generally accurate” and 
“consistent.” 1242 This assertion is not supported by CIA records. Throughout the period during 



1233 See, for example, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Hearing on the Central Intelligence Agency 

Detention and Interrogation 12, 2007 (SSCI #2007-3158). 

1234 Interview of by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED), Office of the Inspector General, May 

15, 2003. 

1235 Interview of by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 3, 

2003. 

1236 Sametime Communication, an< l [REDACTED], 02/May/05, 14:51:48 to 15:17:39. The 

“Majid Khan stuff’ refers to confronting KSM with the reporting of Majid Khan, then in foreign government 
custody. _ 

1237 Interview of by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector 

General, August 2^2003^^^^ 

1238 Interview of by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, October 



22, 2003. 

1239 



11715 (201047Z MAY 03) 
1240 Sametime Communication, 



and 



Sametime also includes the following statement from 




1, 15/Aug/06, 10:28:38 to 10:58:00. The 

‘I think it’s a dangerous message to say we 



could do almost the same without measures. Begs the question- then why did you use them before?” 

1241 Interview of ■■■■■, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, April 1 1 
and 13, 2003. 

1242 “Khalil Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent Source On Al-Qa’ida,” was authored by [REDACTED], 
CTC/UBLD/AQPO/AQLB. CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team- “Renditions, Detentions, and 
Interrogations (RDI)” including “Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009,” referenced 
materials attached to cover memorandum with the title, “D/CIA Conference Room Seating Visit by President-elect 
Barrack [sic] Obama National Security Tean^uesday^^anuar^009^3^- 1 1 :30 a.m.” 

top secre t/J^^BBI^MB^WB#nqforn 



Page 21 3 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



which KSM was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, KSM provided 
inaccurate information, much of which he would later acknowledge was fabricated and recant. 
Specifically, KSM’s fabrications and recantations covered his activities immediately before his 
capture, 1243 the identity of an individual whom he described as the protector of his children, 1244 
plotting against a U.S. aircraft carrier, a meeting with Abu Faraj al-Libi, and the location of 
Hassan Ghul. 1245 KSM fabricated significant information, which he would later recant, related to 
Jaffar al-Tayyar, stating that al-Tayyar and Jose Padilla were plotting together, 1246 linking al- 
Tayyar to Heathrow Airport plotting 1247 and to Majid Khan’s plotting, 1248 and producing what 
CIA officials described as an “elaborate tale” linking al-Tayyar to an assassination plot against 
former President Jimmy Carter. 1249 KSM later explained that “he had been forced to lie” about 
al-Tayyar due to the pressure from CIA interrogators. 1250 KSM recanted other information about 
the Heathrow Airport plotting, including information regarding the targeting, 1251 additional 
operatives, and the tasking of prospective pilots to study at flight schools. 1252 KSM provided 
significant information on Abu Issa al-Britani (Dhiren Barot) that he would later recant, 
including linking Abu Issa al-Britani to Jaffar al-Tayyar and to the Heathrow Airport plot. 1253 
Under direct threat of additional waterboarding, 1254 KSM told CIA interrogators that he had sent 
Abu Issa al-Britani to Montana to recruit African-American Muslim converts. 1255 In June 2003, 
KSM stated he fabricated the story because he was “under ‘enhanced measures’ when he made 
these claims and simply told his interrogators what he thought they wanted to hear.” 1256 KSM 
also stated that he tasked Majid Khan with recruiting Muslims in the United States, 1257 which he 




34513 (052246Z MAR 03); ^^^Hl 1 139 (051956Z APR 03) 

34569 (061722Z MAR 03); 1281 (130801Z J UN 04); 

1 5712 email from: [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED^^^^ect: planned release of [DETENTION SITE ORANGE] detainee Syed Habib; date: IBB 

10751 (102258Z MAR 03)JBB| 10762 (1 12020Z MA R 03), di sseminated as 
2 3796 (1 21 932Z AUG 04); §^>20873 ( 081631Z MAR 04); ■■ 20873 (081631Z MAR 04); 
DIRECTOR ■■ (101847Z MAY 04); DIRECTOR ^^B(101847Z MAY 04) 

10740 (092308Z MAR 03), disseminate^^^l^mBU; 10741 (100917Z MAR 

03);j\LECBB ( 1 20 1 34Z MAR 03) 

10883 (182127^1A^3), dissertated as 1 1717 (201722Z MAY 

03), disseminated as 10778 (121549Z MAR 03), disseminated as | 

10894 (191513Z MAR 03);^^^B 10902 (201037Z MAR 03) 

10959 (231205Z MAR 03); 10950 (222127Z MAR 03) 

10902 (201037Z MAR 03); BIH 1095 9 (231205Z MAR 03 ); | 

11377 (231943Z APR 03), disseminated asj 
10798 (13181 6Z MAR 03), disseminated as | 

(192314Z MAY 03); ■■■ 11717 (201222Z MAY 





10950 (222127Z MAR 



]44 20BBN 

12141 (27223 1Z JUN 





12141 (272231Z JUN 03); 



10778 (121549Z MAR 03), disseminated as 
22939 (031541Z JUL 04); WKtM 10883 (182127Z MAR 03), disseminated asj 
10828 (151310Z MAR 03), includecUis part of disseminated intelligence 
^March 17, 2003, interrogation; HHH 108 83 (182127Z MAR 0 3), disseminated as 
1 1717 (201722Z MAY 03), disseminated as 

10941 (221506Z MAR 03); ■■■ 1095 0 (222127Z MAR 03) 

10942 (221610Z MAR 0 3), disseminated as H^IHI 10948 (222101Z MAR 

03) , dissemina ted as | 

1256 12 095 (222049Z JUN 03) 

10942 (221610Z MAR 03), disseminate^^ 

mi'M i mi N 

Page 214 of 499 



1257 





UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TGP - SE G RET// 



//NOFOR N 



would later recant. 1258 On May 3, 2003, CIA officers recommended revisiting the information 
KSM had provided “during earlier stages of his interrogation process,” noting that “he has told us 
that he said some things during this phase to get the enhanced measures to stop, therefore some 
of this information may be suspect.” 1259 



c ) The CIA also repeatedly referred to a comment made by KSM 



while he was still in Pakistani custody as indicating that KSM had information on an imminent 
attack. In reports to the inspector general, 1260 the national security advisor, 1261 and the 
Department of Justice, 1262 among others, the CIA represented that: 



“When asked about future attacks planned against the United States, he coldly 
replied ‘Soon, you will know.’ In fact, soon we did know - after we initiated 
enhanced measures.” 1263 



Contrary to CIA representations, CIA records indicate that KSM’s comment was interpreted by 
CIA officers with KSM at the time as meaning that KSM was seeking to use his future 
cooperation as a “bargaining chip” with more senior CIA officers. 1264 

Finally, the CIA attributed to KSM, along with Abu Zubaydah, the 
statement that “the general US population was ‘weak,’ lacked resilience, and would be unable to 
‘do what was necessary’ to prevent the terrorists from succeeding in their goals.” 1265 There are 
no CIA operational or interrogation records to support the representation that KSM or Abu 
Zubaydah made these statements. 



1258 



31148(1719192 DEC 05); 



31147(1719192 DEC 05), 



12558 (0 41938Z AU G 03); | 
diss eminated a s | 

1259 mi 1 1487 (0315512 MAY 03). As detailed in Volumes II and 111, KSM’s claims that he fabricated 
information appeared credible to CIA officers. Other intelligence collection supported these claims. 

126 ° Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) 
Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7 123-IG); 
date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

1261 CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence ,” Subject: 
“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterror ist Interrogation Techniques,” included in email from: 

and | 

techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. 



|; subject: “paper on value of interrogation 



>262 March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from | 



Legal Group, DC1 



Counterterrorist Center re: Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques. 



1263 Email from: 




; cc: 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|; subject: re Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: February 9, 2004. Memorandum for: 
Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG 
Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7 123-IG); date: February 27, 2004; 
attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Activities. 



1264 




41627 ( 051329Z MA R 03) 

Jim Legal Group, DCI 



41592 (051050Z MAR 03); 

1265 March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from 
Counterterrorist Center re: Effectiveness onh^Cl^Counterterronsnnte^gation Techniques. 

1(11 Mill I I >K HIM 

Page 215 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



E. CIA Effectiveness Claims Regarding a “High Volume of Critical Intelligence” 

The CIA represented that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques resulted in the collection of “a high volume of critical intelligence 1266 on al- 
Qa’ida.” 1267 The Committee evaluated the “high volume” of intelligence collected by compiling 
the total number of sole source and multi-source disseminated intelligence reports from the 1 19 
known CIA detainees. 1268 

The CIA informed the Committee that its interrogation program 
was successful in developing intelligence and suggested that all CIA detainees produced 
disseminated intelligence reporting. For example, in September 2006, CIA Director Michael 
Hayden provided the following testimony to the Committee: 

Senator Bayh: “I was impressed by your statement about how effective the 
[CIA’s enhanced interrogation] techniques have been in eliciting important 
information to the country, at one point up to 50 percent of our information 
about al-Qa’ida. I think you said 9000 different intelligence reports?” 

Director Hayden: “Over 8000, sir.” 

Senator Bayh: “And yet this has come from, I guess, only thirty individuals.” 



126(5 j^e “critical” description in this CIA representation is addressed in the section of this summary concerning the 
reported acquisition of actionable intelligence after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques that the 
CIA represented as enabling the CIA to thwart terrorist plots and capture specific terrorists. See Volume II for 
additional information. 

1267 Among other documents, see CIA Memorandum for the National Security Advisor (Rice) entitled, 
“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” December 2004; CIA Memorandum to the 
Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” March 2, 
2005; CIA briefing notes entitled, “Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program,” 
March 4, 2005; CIA talking points for the National Security Council entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 
DCI Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques,” dated March 4, 
2005; CIA briefing notes entitled, “Briefing for Chief of Staff to the President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, 
Detention, and Interrogation Programs,” dated May 2, 2006; CIA briefing document, entitled, “DCIA Talking 
Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, with the notation the document was “sent to 
DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” Also included in additional briefing documents referenced and 
described in this summary. 

1268 \yhjie cja multi-source intelligence reports are included in the Committee Study, the quantitative analysis in 
this summary is based on sole-source intelligence reporting, as these reports best reflect reporting from CIA 
detainees. Multi-source intelligence reports are reports that contain data from multiple detainees. As described 
above, a common multi-source report would result from the CIA showing a picture of an individual to all CIA 
detainees at a specific CIA detention site. A report would be produced regardless if detainees were or were n ot able 
to identify or provide information on the individual. As a specific example, see HEADQUARTERS 

(202255Z JUN 06), which states that from January 1, 2006 - April 30, 2006, information from Hambali was “used 
in the dissemination of three intelligence reports, two of which were non-recognitions of Guantanamo Bay 
detainees,” while the third “detailed [Hambali’s] statement that he knew of no threats or plots to attack any world 
sporting events.” Sole-source reports, by contrast, are based on specific informa tion provided by one CIA detainee. 

ini 'ill III I"— — II H 

Page 216 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFOR N 



Director Hayden: “No, sir, 96, all 96. 



Ml 269 



In April 2007, CIA Director Hayden testified that the CIA’s 
interrogation program existed “for one purpose - intelligence,” and that it is “the most successful 
program being conducted by American intelligence today” for “preventing attacks, disabling al- 
Qa’ida.” 1270 At this hearing Director Hayden again suggested that the CIA interrogation program 
was successful in obtaining intelligence from all CIA detainees. 1271 A transcript of that hearing 
included the following exchange: 



Senator Snowe: “General Hayden. Of the 8000 intelligence reports that were 
provided, as you said, by 30 of the detainees.” 



Director Hayden: “By all 97, ma’am.” 1272 

The suggestion that all CIA detainees provided information that 
resulted in intelligence reporting is not supported by CIA records. CIA records reveal that 34 
percent of the 119 known CIA detainees produced no intelligence reports, and nearly 70 percent 
produced fewer than 15 intelligence reports. Of the 39 detainees who were, according to CIA 
records, subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, nearly 20 percent produced 
no intelligence reports, while 40 percent produced fewer than 15 intelligence reports. While the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program did produce significant amounts of disseminated 
intelligence reporting (5,874 sole-source intelligence reports), this reporting was overwhelmingly 
derived from a small subset of CIA detainees. For example, of the 119 CIA detainees identified 
in the Study, 89 percent of all disseminated intelligence reporting was derived from 25 CIA 
detainees. Five CIA detainees produced more than 40 percent of all intelligence reporting from 
the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. CIA records indicate that two of the five 
detainees were not subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1273 

F. The Eight Primary CIA Effectiveness Representations — the Use of the CIA’s Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques “Enabled the CIA to Disrupt Terrorist Plots” and “Capture 
Additional Terrorists” 



From 2003 through 2009, 1274 the CIA consistently and repeatedly 
represented that its enhanced interrogation techniques were effective and necessary to produce 



1269 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Briefing by the Director, Central Intelligence Agency, on the Central 
Intelligence Agency Detention, Interrogation and Rendition Program, September 6, 2006 (SSC1 #2007-1336). At 
the time this statement was made there had been at least 1 18 CIA detainees. 

1270 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Hearing on the Central Intelligence Agency Detention and 
Interrogation Program, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

1271 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Hearing on the Central Intelligence Agency Detention and 
Interrogation Program, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

1272 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Hearing on the Central Intelligence Agency Detention and 
Interrogation Program, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

1273 See detainee intelligence reporting data in Volume II. 

1274 The CIA represented in 2002 that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were necessary and effective. 
The Committee analysis focuses on CIA representation^etweei^00^n^2009, during which time the CIA 

nil m in i him 

Page 217 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O FORN 



critical intelligence that “enabled the CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture additional terrorists, 
and collect a high-volume of critical intelligence on al-Qa’ida.” The CIA further stated that the 
information acquired as a result of the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques could 
not have been acquired by the U.S. government in any other way (“otherwise unavailable”). 1275 



provided specific examples of counterterrorism “successes” the CIA attributed to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 

1275 See list of 20 CIA representations included in this summary. From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s 
representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques included a specific set of 
examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that the CIA attributed to infonnation obtained from 
the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained 
from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in 
“saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see'. (1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office 
of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations 
on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their 
legality. The CIA representations referenced by the OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” “vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was 
“essential” for the U.S. government to “detect and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states 
that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for 
preventing a subsequent attack within the United States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy 
General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of 
the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al 
Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum 
dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech 
describing the CIA’s interrogation program (which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC 
memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation 
techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities 
of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us 
information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, the program has saved innocent lives.’” (See 
Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, 
Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War 
Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for 
members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 represented that “the use of Enhanced 
Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence information that had, in the view of CIA 
professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[germination of this program will result in loss of life, 
possibly extensive.” (See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from Scott Muller, Subject: Review of 
Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 
2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the 
Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector 
General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: “Information [the CIA] received. . . as a result of 
the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has almost certainly saved countless American lives 
inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to the fact that without the use of such techniques, 
we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” 
(See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) 
Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; 
date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA Director Leon Panetta in February 
2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the [enhanced interrogation] techniques 
were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of the timely intelligence acquired 
from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other means.” (See CIA briefing 
documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9^CI^Briefin^nRDIProOTam- 18FEB.2009” and graphic 

TOP secre t^^BHM^MM ^qfgrn 

Page 218 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 




The CIA also represented that the best measure of effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques was examples of specific terrorist plots “thwarted” and specific 
terrorists captured as a result of the use of the CIA’s techniques. 

For example, in a December 2004 CIA memorandum prepared for 
the national security advisor, the CIA wrote that there was “no way to conduct” an 
“independent study of the foreign intelligence efficacy of using enhanced interrogation 
techniques,” but stated, “[t]he Central Intelligence Agency can advise you that this program 
works and the techniques are effective in producing foreign intelligence.” To illustrate the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s interrogation techniques, the CIA provided 11 examples of “[k]ey 
intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation techniques,” nine of 
which referenced specific terrorist plots or the capture of specific terrorists. 1276 Similarly, under 
the heading, “Plots Discovered as a Result of EITs,” a CIA briefing prepared for President Bush 
in November 2007 states, “reporting statistics alone will not provide a fair and accurate measure 
of the effectiveness of EITs.” Instead, the CIA provided eight “examples of key intelligence 
collected from CIA detainee interrogations after applying the waterboard along with other 
interrogation techniques,” seven of which referenced specific terrorist plots or the capture of 
specific terrorists. 1277 

The Committee selected 20 CIA documents that include CIA 
representations about the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from 
2003 through 2009. The 20 CIA documents, which were consistent with a broader set of CIA 
representations made during this period, include materials the CIA prepared for the White 



attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Klialid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM) 
including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and Effectiveness,” with associated 
documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” “Background on Key Intelligence 
Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background on Key Captures and Plots 
Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on March 18, 2009, entitled, 
“[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, which provides a list of 
“some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence acquired from 
detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See Volume II for 
additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the CIA to obtain 
unique, otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1276 Italics in original document. See CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central 

Intelli gence,” Subject: “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterror^ included in email 

from: to: HHIHHiH’ and HHHHHR subject: on 

value of interrogation techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. The email references the attached 
“information paper to Dr. Rice explaining the value of the interrogation techniques.” The document includes the 
following: The “Karachi Plot,” “The Heathrow Plot,” The “Second Wave,” “The Guraba Cell,” “Issa al-Hindi,” 
“Abu Talha al -Pakistani,” “Hambali’s Capture,” “Jafaar al-Tayyar,” “Dirty Bomb Plot,” “Shoe Bomber,” and 
“Shkai, Pakistan.” 

1277 See CIA document entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, 
with the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” The document 
states, under the heading, “Plots Discovered as a Result of EITs,” that “reporting statistics alone will not provide a 
fair and accurate measure of the effectiveness of EITs,” and then provides a list of “examples of key intelligence 
collected from CIA detainee interrogations after applying the waterboard along with other interrogation 
techniques.. .The ‘Second Wave’...Hambali’s Capture... The Guraba Cell... Shoe Bomber... Issa al-Hindi... Jafaar 
al-Tayyar... The Karachi Plot... The Heathrow Plot” (italics added). 



Page 219 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET// 



flNOFORN 



House, the Department of Justice, the Congress, the CIA Office of Inspector General, as well as 
incoming members of President Obama’s national security team, and the public. The Committee 
selected the following 20 CIA documents: 

1. July and September 2003: CIA Briefing Documents Seeking Policy Reaffirmation of the 
CIA Interrogation Program from White House Officials, “Review of Interrogation 
Program.” 1278 

2. February 2004: The CIA’s Response to the Draft Inspector General Special Review, CIA 
“Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program,’” and attachment, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Activities.” 1279 

3. July 2004: CIA Intelligence Assessment, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent 
Source on Al-Qa’ida.” 1280 

4. December 2004: CIA Memorandum for the President’s National Security Advisor, 
“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 1281 

5. March 2005: CIA Memorandum for the Office of Legal Counsel, “Effectiveness of the 
CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 1282 

6. March 2005: CIA “Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation 
Program.” 1283 



1278 CIA memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program dated 
July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. Additional briefings are detailed in September 4, 2003, 
CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the 
Record from Scott Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program. 

1279 CIA memorandum to the CIA Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, 
dated February 27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program’ (2003-7 123-IG),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Activities,” dated February 24, 2004. 

1280 CIA Directorate of Intelligence, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent Source on Al-Qa’ida,” dated Jul y 13 , 
2004; fax to the Department of Justice, April 22, 2005, entitled, Materials on KSM and Abu Zubaydah.|H” 
This report was widely disseminated in the Intelligence Community, and a copy of this report was provided to the 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on July 15, 2004. On March 31, 2009, former Vice President Cheney 
requested the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which was publicly released with redactions on 
August 24, 2009. 

1281 CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence, ” Subject: 

“Effectivenesju)^^ In terrogation Techniq ues,” included in email from: to: 

ar| d subject: on value 

techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. The email references the attached “information paper to Dr. 
Rice explaining the value of the interrogation techniques.” 

1282 CI^Memorandum forSteve Bradbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, 

from m Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject: “Effectiveness of the CIA 

Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 

1283 CIA briefing for Vice President Cheney, dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for Vice President Cheney: 

CIA Detention and Interrogation Program.” 

mi 1 1 in i 1 "i mi mu I 

Page 220 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET - // 



//NOF O R N 



7. March 2005: CIA Talking Points for the National Security Council, “Effectiveness of the 
High-Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques.” 1284 

8. April 2005: CIA “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” provided to the 
Department of Justice for the OLC’s assessment of the legality of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 1285 

9. April 2005: CIA “Materials of KSM and Abu Zubaydah” and additional CIA documents 
provided to the Department of Justice for the OLC’s assessment of the legality of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1286 

10. June 2005: CIA Intelligence Assessment, “Detainee Reporting Pivotal for the War 
Against Al-Qa’ida.” 1287 

11. December 2005: CIA Document entitled, “Future of CIA’s Counterterrorist Detention 
and Interrogation Program,” with the attachment, “Impact of the Loss of the Detainee 
Program to CT Operations and Analysis,” from CIA Director Porter Goss to Stephen 
Hadley, Assistant to the President/National Security Advisor, Frances Townsend, 
Assistant to the President/Homeland Security Advisor, and Ambassador John 
Negroponte, the Director of National Intelligence. 1288 

12. May 2006: CIA Briefing for the President’s Chief of Staff, “CIA Rendition, Detention 
and Interrogation Programs,” on the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 1289 



1284 CIA Talking Points entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DC1 Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High- 
Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques.” 

1285 CIA “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” faxed from the CIA to the Department of Justice on 
April 15, 2005, at 10:47AM. 

1286 CIA fax to DOJ Command Center, dated Apri^2, 2005, for Office of Legal Counsel, U.S. 

Department of Justice, from Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, re: H, Materials 

of KSM and Abu Zubaydah, included CIA Intelligence Assessment “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent 
Source on Al-Qa’ida,” and CIA document, “Materials of KSM and Abu Zubaydah.” 

1287 CIA Intelligence Assessment, “Detainee Reporting Pivotal for the War Against Al-Qa’ida,” June 2005, which 
CIA records indicate was provided to White House officials on June 1, 2005. The Intelligence Assessment at the 
SECRET//NOFORN classification level was more broadly disseminated on June 3, 2005. On March 31, 2009, 
former Vice President Cheney requested the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which was publicly 
released with redactions on August 24, 2009. 

1288 CIA memorandum entitled, “Future of CIA’s Counterterrorist Detention and Interrogation Program,” dated 
December 23, 2005, from CIA Director Porter Goss to Stephen J. Hadley, Assistant to the President/National 
Security Advisor, Frances F. Townsend, Assistant to the President/Homeland Security Advisor, Ambassador John 
D. Negroponte, the Director of National Intelligence, Attachment, “Impact of the Loss of the Detainee Program to 
CT Operations and Analysis.” 

1289 CIA briefing document dated May 2, 2006, entitled, “BRIEFING FOR CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE 
PRESIDENT 2 May 2006 Briefing for Chief of Staff to the President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention and 
Interrogation Programs.” 

mi it ii i i I nil mi 1 1 

Page 221 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 



13. July 2006: CIA Memorandum for the Director of National Intelligence, “Detainee 
Intelligence Value Update.” 1290 

14. September 2006: CIA documents supporting the President’s September 6, 2006, speech, 
including representations on the effectiveness of the CIA’s interrogation program, 
including: “DRAFT Potential Public Briefing of CIA’s High-Value Terrorist 
Interrogations Program,” “CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy,” and 
“Summary of the High Value Terrorist Detainee Program.” 1291 

15. April 2007: CIA Director Michael Hayden’s Testimony to the Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence describing the effectiveness of the CIA’s interrogation program. 1292 

16. October 2007: CIA Talking Points for the Senate Appropriations Committee, addressing 
the effectiveness of theCIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, entitled, “Talking 
Points Appeal of the $H Million Reduction in CIA/CTC’s Rendition and Detention 
Program.” 1293 

17. November 2007: CIA Director Talking Points for the President, entitled, “Waterboard 06 
November 2007,” on the effectiveness of the CIA’s waterboard interrogation 
technique. 1294 

18. January 2009: CIA Briefing for President-elect Obama’s National Security Transition 
Team on the value of the CIA’s “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations (RDI).” 1295 

19. February 2009: CIA Briefing for CIA Director Leon Panetta on the effectiveness of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009,” “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” “EITs and Effectiveness,” “Key Intelligence Impacts 
Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” “Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: 



1290 CIA briefing document entitled, “Detainee Intelligence Value Update,” dated 1 1 July 2006, internal document 
saved within CIA records as, “DNI Memo Intel Value July 1 1 2006... TALKING POINTS FOR DCI MEETING.” 

1291 CIA document dated July 16, 2006, entitled, “DRAFT Potential Public Briefing of CIA’s High-Value Terrorist 
Interrogations Program,” and “CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy,” drafts supporting the September 6, 
2006, speech by President George W. Bush acknowledging and describing the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program, as well as an unclassified Office of the Director of National Intelligence release, entitled, “Summary of the 
High Value Terrorist Detainee Program.” 

1292 CIA classified Statement for the Record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael 
V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007; and accompanying Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence hearing transcript for April 12, 2007, entitled, “Hearing on Central Intelligence Agency Detention and 
Interrogation Program.” 

1293 CIA fax from CIA employee [REDACTED] to U.S. Senate Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on 
Defense, with fax cover sheet entitled, “Talking points,” sent on October 26, 2007, at 5:39:48 PM. Document faxed 
entitled, “Talking Points Appeal of the $H Million reduction in CIA/CTC’s Rendition and Detention Program.” 

1294 “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007 with the notation the 
document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 

1295 CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team- “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations (RDI)” including 
“Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RD^rograii^^an^009/^repared “13 January 2009.” 

1 1 ii iii iii i MM 

Page 222 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Attachment,” and “Background on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted,” among other CIA 
documents. 1296 



20. March 2009: CIA Memorandum for the Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence, including representations on the “Key Captures and Disrupted Plots Gained 
from HVDs in the RDI Program.” 1297 



(TS//|H|||^^H^NE) From the 20 CIA documents, the Committee identified the CIA’s 
eight most frequently cited examples of “thwarted” plots and captured terrorists that the CIA 
attributed to information acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques: 



Eight Most Frequently Cited Examples of Plots “Thwarted” 
and Terrorists^Captwed Provided by the CIA as Evidence for 
the Effectiveness of the CIA % Enhanced Interrogation ; 

Techniques . 


i Referenced X Number 
of Times iiiithe 20 CIA 
| Documents 


1 


The Thwarting of the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings Plot and 
the Capture of Jose Padilla 


17/20 


2 


The Thwarting of the Karachi Plots 


17/20 


3 


The Thwarting of the Second Wave Plot and the Discovery 
of the al-Ghuraba Group 


18/20 


4 


The Thwarting of the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot 
and the Capture of Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi 


17/20 


5 


The Identification, Capture, and Arrest of lyman Faris 


7/20 


6 


The Identification, Capture, and Arrest of Sajid Badat 


17/20 


7 


The Thwarting of the Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf 
Plotting 


20/20 


8 


The Capture of Hambali 


18/20 



The Committee sought to confirm that the CIA’s representations 
about the most frequently cited examples of “thwarted” plots and captured terrorists were 
consistent with the more than six million pages of CIA detention and interrogation records 
provided to the Committee. Specifically, the Committee assessed whether the CIA’s 
representations that its enhanced interrogation techniques produced unique, otherwise 
unavailable intelligence 1298 that led to the capture of specific terrorists and the “thwarting” of 



1296 CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DC1A Briefing on RDI Program- 1 8FEB.2009” and 
graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid Shaykh Muhammad 
(KSM),” Includes “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and Effectiveness,” with 
associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” “Background on Key 
Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background on Key Captures and 
Plots Disrupted.” 

1297 CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on March 18, 2009, at 3:46 PM, entitled, 
“[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” which includes “Key Captures and Disrupted Plots Gained From HVDs in the RDI 
Program” (DTS #2009-1258). 

1298 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding tire effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained fronHh^s^nt^nhance^nte^ogation techniques. CIA 

mi 1 1 i n i |i <ii'Miii 

Page 223 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see\ 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 
“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[t]ermination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” ( See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” ( See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” ( See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, 
which provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailab le intellige nce that “saved liv es.” 

i iii 1 1 iii i im mu 

Page 224 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O F O R N 



specific plots were accurate. 1299 The Committee found the CIA’s representations to be 
inaccurate and unsupported by CIA records. 

(TS^mHH^^/NF) Below are the summaries of the CIA’s eight most frequently cited 
examples of “thwarted” plots and captured terrorists, as well as a description of the CIA’s claims 
and an explanation for why the CIA representations were inaccurate and unsupported by CIA 
records. 1300 

1. The Thwarting of the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings Plot and the Capture of Jose Padilla 

Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and necessary to produce critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, 
which enabled the CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture terrorists, and save lives. Over a period 
of years, the CIA provided the thwarting of terrorist plotting associated with, and the capture of, 
Jose Padilla, as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
These CIA representations were inaccurate. The CIA first received reporting on the terrorist 
threat posed by Jose Padilla from a foreign government. Eight days later, Abu Zubaydah 
provided information on the terrorist plotting of two individuals, whom he did not identify by 
true name, to FBI special agents. Abu Zubaydah provided this information in April 2002, prior 
to the commencement of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in August 2002. The plots 
associated with Jose Padilla were assessed by the Intelligence Community to be infeasible. 



1299 The CIA has represented that it has provided the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence with all CIA records 
related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. This document production phase lasted more than three 
years and was completed in July 2012. The records produced include more than six million pages of material, 
including records detailing the interrogation of detainees, as well as the disseminated intelligence derived from the 
interrogation of CIA detainees. The CIA did not provide — nor was it requested to provide — intelligence records that 
were unrelated to the CIA Detention and Interrogation Program. In other words, this Study was completed without 
direct access to reporting from CIA HUMINT assets, foreign liaison assets, electronic intercepts, military detainee 
debriefings, law enforcement deri ved information, and other methods of intelligence collection. Insomuch as this 
material is included in the analysis herein, it was provided by the CIA within the context of documents directly 
related to the CIA Detention and Interrogation Program. For example, a requirements cable from CIA Headquarters 
to CIA interrogators at a CIA detention site could cite SIGNALS intelligence collected by NSA, or include a CIA 
HUMINT source report on a particular subject, with a request to question the CIA detainee about the reporting. 
While direct access to the NSA report, or the CIA HUMINT report, may not have been provided, it may still be 
included in this Study because it appeared in the CIA Headquarters requirements cable relating to the questioning of 
a CIA detainee. As such, there is likely significant intelligence related to the terrorist plots, terrorists captured, and 
other intelligence matters examined in this report, that is unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 
and within the databases of the U.S. Intelligence Community, but which has not been identified or reviewed by the 
Select Committee on Intelligence for this Study. As is detailed in the near 6800-page Committee Study, the 
Committee found that there was significant intelligence in CIA databases to enable the capture of the terrorists cited, 
and “disrupt” the terrorist plots represented as “thwarted,” without intelligence from the CIA interrogation program. 
Had the Committee been provided with access to all intelligence available in CIA and Intelligence Community 
databases, it is likely this finding would be strengthened further. Finally, as of March 2014, the White House had 
not yet provided approximately 9,400 documents related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program — 
equivalent to less than .2 percent of CIA detention and interrogation records — pending an Executive Privilege 
determination. The Committee requested access to these documents in three letters dated January 3, 2013, May 22, 
2013, and December 19, 2013. The White House did not respond to the requests. 

1300 See Volume II for additional informati on and analysis. 

III! Mini I INI Mill I 

Page 225 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



Further Details: The Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings plotting refers to 
terrorist plotting involving U.S. citizen Jose Padilla. Padilla and his associate, Binyam 
Mohammed, conceived the “Dirty Bomb Plot” after locating information, derived from what the 
CIA described as “a satirical internet article” entitled “How to Make an H-bomb,” on a computer 
at a Pakistani safe house in early 2002. 1301 The article instructed would-be bomb makers to 
enrich uranium by placing it “in a bucket, attaching it to a six foot rope, and swinging it around 
your head as fast as possible for 45 minutes.” 1302 Padilla and Mohammed approached Abu 
Zubaydah in early 2002, and later KSM, with their idea to build and use this device in the United 
States. 1303 Neither Abu Zubaydah nor KSM believed the plan was viable, 1304 but KSM provided 
funding for, and tasked Padilla to conduct, an operation using natural gas to create explosions in 
tall buildings in the United States, 1305 later known as the “Tall Buildings Plot.” 1306 



1301 10090 (210703Z APR 02) and CIA Document, Subject: “CIA Statement Summarizing Significant 

Information About Jose Padilla (21:10 hrs.- 8 June 02}.” For more information on the Internet article that 
recommended enriching uranium by “putting it into a bucket and twisting it around one’s head to enrich it,” see 
“How to Make an H-Bomb” and [REDACTED] 2281 (071658Z MAY 04). See also email from: [REDACTED], 
JI^OTA/CTWG/CBRN Group; to: [REDACTED] and multiple ccs, including subject: “Re: 

[REDACTED]: Re: KSM homework on AQ nuke program”; date: April 22, 2003, at 03:30 PM, explaining CIA’s 
CBRN group’s position on Padilla and Mohammed’s plotting. According to the email: “Padilla and 
Binyam/Zouaoui had pulled an article off a satirical web site called ‘How to make an H-bomb’ which is based on a 
1979 Journal of Irreproducible Results article. The article was intended to be humorous and included instructions 
such as enriching uranium by placing liquid uranium hexaflouride in a bucket, attaching it to a six foot rope, and 
swinging it around your head as fast as possible for 45 minutes. While it appears that Padilla and Zouaoui took the 
article seriously, Zubaydah recommended that they take their (cockamamie) ideas to (I believe) KSM in Karachi. It 
was at that point that KSM told them to focus on bringi ng down apartment buildings with explosives, (in other 
words: keep your day jobs).” U.K. courts noted “that 



1302 Email from: [REDACTED], CTC/OTA/CBRNB; subject: “Note to Briefers Updating Zubaydah ‘Uranium 
Device’ Information”; date: April 23, 2002, at 08:25:40 PM. The email states, “CIA and Lawrence Livermore 
National Lab have assessed that the article is filled with countless technical inaccuracies which would likely result in 
the death of anyone attempting to follow the instructions, and would definitely not result in a nuclear explosive 
dev ice.” See al so [REDACTED] 2281 (071658Z MAY 04). 

1303 ■^■■10090 (210703Z AP R 02) 

1304 CIA^^^Bf (290925Z APR 02); 11086 (261 140Z APR 02). See also Padilla statement noting Abu 

Zubaydah “chuckled at the idea,” but sent Padilla and Muhammad to Karachi to present the idea to KSM. See fax 
from Pat Rowan, Department of Justice National Security Division, to [REDACTED], at CTC Legal, on August 15, 
2007, with subject line: “Jose Padilla.” 

1305 DIRECTOR ■■ (041637Z). See also CIA ■■ (290 925Z AP R 02); ||^H| 10091 (210959Z APR 

02); [REDACTED] 2281 (071658Z MAY 04); and DIRECTOR (101 725Z MAR 04). 

1306 For additional background on the Dirty Bomb/Tall Buildings Plotting, see fax from Pat Rowan, Department of 
Justice National Security Division, to [REDACTED], at CTC Legal, on August 15, 2007, with subject line: “Jose 
Padilla.” The document states: “Jose Padilla is a United States citizen who has been designated as an enemy 
combatant by the President and has been detained by the military since June 9, 2002. Padilla is commonly known as 
he ‘dirty bomber’ because early intelligence from a senior al Qaeda detainee [Abu Zubaydah] and Padilla’s 
intended accomplice [Binyam Muhammad] indicated that he had proposed to senior al Qaeda leaders the use of a 
radiological dispersion device, or ‘dirty bomb,’ against United States targets, or interests, and he was detained by the 
.military partly on that basis. Based on later and more complete intelligence, including Padilla’s own statements 

/ during military detention, it now appears that Padilla re-entered the United States after he accepted a mission from al 
Qaeda leaders, specifically from Khalid Sheikh Mohammad (‘KSM’), the emir of the attacks of September 11, to 
destroy one or more high-rise apartment buildings in the United States through the use of natural gas explosions 
triggered by timing devices, and had received training, equipment and money for that mission.” See also other 
records that describe the plotting as targeting tall apartment buildings, without reference to a radiological or “dirty” 
bomb. For example, a July 15, 2004, CIA intelligencerep^^ Muhammad: Preeminent 

mi II hi i 

Page 226 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 




The capture of, and the thwarting of terrorist plotting associated 
with Jose Padilla, is one of the eight most frequently cited examples provided by the CIA as 
evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Over a period of 
years, CIA documents prepared for and provided to senior policymakers, intelligence officials, 
and the Department of Justice represent the identification and/or the capture of Jose Padilla, 
and/or the disruption of the “Dirty Bomb,” and/or the “Tall Buildings” plotting, as examples of 
how “[k]ey intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation 
techniques” had “enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots” and “capture additional terrorists.” 1307 
The CIA further represented that the intelligence acquired from the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was “otherwise unavailable” and “saved lives.” 1308 

Source on Al-Qa’ida,” noted: “From late 2001 until early 2003, KSM also conceived several low-level plots, 
including an early 2002 plan to send al-Qa’ida operative and US citizen Jose Padilla to set off bombs in high-rise 
apartment buildings in an unspecified major US city.” Similarly, an Intelligence Community report titled, “Khalid 
Shaykli Muhammad’s Threat Reporting — Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” noted: “Binyam 
Muhammad stated during his debriefings that his and Padilla’s objective was to topple a high-rise building with a 
gas explosion in Chicago.” ( See Community Counterterrorism Board, Intelligence Community Terrorist Threat 
Assessment, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting — Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard of 
Lies,” Report Number IICT-2003-14, April 3, 2003.) The unclassified ODNI “Summary of the High Value 
Terrorist Detainee Program,” released September 6, 2006, states that, “[w]orking with information from detainees, 
the US disrupted a plot to blow up tall buildings in the United States. KSM later described how he had directed 
operatives to ensure the buildings were high enough to prevent the people trapped above from escaping out of the 
windows, thus ensuring their deaths from smoke inhalation.” 

1307 Italics included in CIA Memorandum to the Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” from March 2, 2005. See also CIA talking points for National Security 
Council entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DC1 Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee 
Interrogation (HVD1) Techniques,” dated March 4, 2005, as well as multiple other CIA briefing records and 
memoranda described in Volume II. 

1308 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see : 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 
“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA-provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 




Page 227 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



For example, a document prepared for Vice President Cheney in 
advance of a March 8, 2005, National Security Council principals meeting states, under a section 
entitled “INTERROGATION RESULTS,” that: 



“Use of DOJ-authorized enhanced interrogation techniques , as part of a 
comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled us to disrupt terrorist 
plots... 

. . .Dirty Bomb Plot: Operatives Jose Padilla and Binyam Mohammed planned 
to build and detonate a ‘dirty bomb’ in the Washington DC area. Plot 
disrupted. Source: Abu Zubaydah.” 1309 



Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[germination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” ( See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” ( See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” {See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, 
which provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1309 CIA document dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for Vice President Cheney: CIA Detention and 
Interrogation Program.” The briefing document further represented that: (1) “Prior to the use of enhanced measures 
against skilled resistors [sic] like KSM and Abu Zubaydah- the two most prolific intelligence producers in our 
control- we acquired little threat information or significant actionable intelligence”; and (2) “[CIA] would not have 
succeeded in overcoming the resistance of KSM, Abu Zubaydah, and other equally resistant HVDs without the 
application of EITs.” x 

T OP segre tvJ^B^BBIMBM^nofqrn 

Page 228 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



Likewise, the July 20, 2007, Department of Justice Office of Legal 
Counsel (OLC) memorandum on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques used CIA- 
provided information on Jose Padilla to describe the threat posed by al-Qa’ida and the success of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to date. The July 20, 2007, OLC memorandum 
states: 



“The CIA interrogation program — and, in particular, its use of enhanced 
interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable 
intelligence. The CIA believes that this program ‘has been a key reason why 
al-Qa’ida has failed to launch a spectacular attack in the West since 1 1 
September 2001’ . . . We understand that use of enhanced techniques has 
produced significant intelligence that the Government has used to keep the 
Nation safe. As the President explained [in his September 6, 2006 speech], ‘ by 
giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else , the 
program has saved innocent lives' . . .For example, we understand that enhanced 
interrogation techniques proved particularly crucial in the interrogations of 
Khalid Shaykh Muhammad and Abu Zubaydah... Interrogations of 
Zubaydah — again, once enhanced techniques were employed — revealed two 
al -Qaeda operatives already in the United States mo and planning to destroy a 
high rise apartment building and to detonate a radiological bomb in 
Washington, D.C.” 1311 



On April 21, 2009, a CIA spokesperson confirmed the accuracy of the information in the OLC 
memorandum in response to the partial declassification of this and other memoranda. 1312 



The CIA provided similar inaccurate representations regarding the 
thwarting of the Dirty Bomb plotting, the thwarting of the Tall Buildings plotting, and/or the 
capture of Jose Padilla in 17 of the 20 documents provided to policymakers and the Department 
of Justice between July 2003 and March 2009. 13 13 



1310 Italics added. CIA records indicate that Abu Zubaydah never provided information on “two operatives already 
in the United States.” While neither Binyam Muhammad nor Jose Padilla was “already in the United States,” the 
OLC description appears to be a reference to Jose Padilla and Binyam Mohammad, as the OLC then makes 
reference to the “Dirty Bomb” and “Tall Buildings” plotting. 

13.1 Italics added. See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: 
Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions 
to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

13.2 See “Waterboarding Saved L.A.,” Washington Times, April 25, 2009. The CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts 
that it “took [the CIA] until 2007 to consistently stop referring to [Padilla’s] ‘Dirty Bomb’ plot — a plan [the CIA] 
concluded early on was never operationally viable.” As noted, the CIA continued to refer to the “Dirty Bomb” 
plotting through 2007 and confirmed the information publicly in 2009. 

1313 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 
Volume II. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 229 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



A review of CIA operational cables and other CIA records found 
that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques played no role in the identification of 
“Jose Padilla” or the thwarting of the Dirty Bomb or Tall Buildings plotting. CIA records 
indicate that: (1) there was significant intelligence in CIA databases acquired prior to — and 
independently of — the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program to fully identify Jose Padilla 
as a terrorist threat and to disrupt any terrorist plotting associated with him; 1314 (2) Abu 
Zubaydah provided information on the terrorist plotting of two individuals who proposed an idea 
to conduct a “Dirty Bomb” attack, but did not identify their true names; (3) Abu Zubaydah 
provided this information to FBI special agents who were using rapport-building techniques, 1315 
in April 2002, more than three months prior to the CIA’s “use of DOJ-approved enhanced 



See. for example, 



Significant Information About Jose Padilla (21 : 10 hrs.- 8 June 02 }”; 



CIA document entitled, “CIA Statement Summarizing 



10972 (12031Z APR 02); ALEC 



(231837Z APR 02); and 



10976 (120948Z APR 02); among other records. 



1315 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and providecDcHheSenate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS# 
2010-2939). See also 



10092 (211031Z APR 02). While Abu Zubaydah was subjected to sleep 
deprivation and nudity prior to this date by the CIA, he had been allowed to sleep shortly prior to being questioned 
on this matter by the FBI special agents, who were exclusively using rapport-building interrogation techniques when 
the information was acquired from Abu Zubaydah (who was covered with a towel). The sleep deprivation and 
nudity as implemented during this period differed from how sleep deprivation and nudity were implemented after 
the CIA developed, and the Department of Justice approved, the CIA’s “enhanced interrogation techniques” in 
August 2002. Rather than being placed in a stress position during sleep deprivation, Abu Zubaydah was kept awake 
by being questioned nearly non-stop by CIA and FBI interrogators. Rec ords further indicate that during breaks in 
the interrogations, Abu Zubaydah was allowed to briefly sleep. See also 10116 (25073 1Z APR 02), 

which describes this sleep deprivation as a period of “no sustained sleep” with “cat naps between interrogators.” 

The cable further states: “Like many medical students, the subject appears to handle 76 plus hours of limited sleep 
with few problems” (italics added). The use of nudity during this period also differed from future uses of nudity, as 
Abu Zubaydah was covered when interrogated by the FBI. See also SSCI Staff interview of FBI Special Agent Ali 
Soufan, April 28, 2008, at 1:20 PM, Hart Senate Office Building (transcript at DTS #2008-2411). Ali Soufan 
described events prior to Abu Zubaydah’s provision of information related to the “Dirty Bomb,” stating: “He was 
injured, badly injured. He was dehydrated. I remember we were putting ice on his lips. And he didn’t have any 
bowel control, so we were cleaning him. And the reason I’m telling you some of these disgusting things is because 
it helped build rapport with the guy in this short period of time.” Later, Ali Soufan described the provision of 
information related to the Dirty Bomb plotting, sta ting: “ When I was going in, he was totally naked. I refused to go 



and interview him naked. So I took a towel. And anc * I and [REDACTED], every time we went in he had to 
be covered or I [wouldn’t] go. It’s as simple as that.” See also section of transcript stating, “So we went back. And 
we start talking to him . We took some Coke, tea, and we start talking about different things. We flipped him about 
different things, and I and [REDACTED]. And then he came back to his senses and he started cooperating 
again. And this is when he gave us Padilla.” (Abu Zubaydah provided information concerning the Dirty Bomb 
plotting and Jose Padilla’s kunya, but did not provide the name “Jose Padilla.” As described in this summary, Jose 
Padilla’s name had already been provided to the CIA by a foreign government that identified Padilla as a U.S. 
citizen suspected of being engaged in possible terrorist activity.) See also Abu Zubaydah detainee review in 
Volume III. 

ini i m in i i 1 >i 1 >i i ) 

Page 230 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 




interrogation techniques”; 1316 and (4) the Intelligence Community internally assessed that the 
“Dirty Bomb” 1317 and “Tall Buildings” 1318 plots were infeasible as envisioned. 1319 



13,6 The Department of Justice finalized its approval of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including 
walling, facial slaps, wall standing, stress positions, sleep deprivation, and the waterboard, as well as other 
techniques, on August 1, 2002. See Volume I and Volume HI for additional details. Beginning on August 4, 2002, 
and extending through August 20, 2002, Abu Zubaydah was subjected to the non-stop concurrent use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, including at least 83 applications of the waterboard. CIA records indicate that 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques ceased on August 30, 2002, when Abu Zubaydah received 
clothing. 

1317 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, to include: (1) email from: [REDACTED]^^^^ 

jgHOTA/CTWG/CBRN Group; to: [REDACTED] and multiple ccs, including subject: “Re: 

[REDACTED]: Re: KSM homework on AQ nuke program”; date: April 22, 2003, at 03:30 PM, explaining CIA’s 
CBRN group’s position on Padilla and Mohammed’s plotting: “Padilla and Binyam/Zouaoui had pulled an article 
off a satirical web site called ‘How to make an H-bomb’ which is based on a 1979 Journal of Irreproducible Results 
article. Tire article was intended to be humorous...”; (2) email from: [REDACTED], CTC/OTA/CBRNB; subject: 
“Note to Briefers Updating Zubaydah ‘Uranium Device’ Information”; date: April 23, 2003, at 08:25:40 PM; and 
(3) U.K. court records relaying that “[Binyam Mohammed] at the outset said there was no Dirty Bomb plot (a 
position he has consistently maintained to his defense lawyers)” (UK Judgment, at 39). According to U.K. legal 
records, “[Binyam Mohammed] said . . . that he had seen a file on a computer in Lahore and decided it was a joke - 
part of the instruction included adding bleach to uranium 238 in a bucket and rotating it around one’s head for 45 
minutes.” (UK Judgment, at 1 1). On June 10, 2002, then- Attorney General John Ashcroft announced, “We have 
captured a known terrorist who was exploring a plan to build and explode a radiological dispersion device, or ‘dirty 
bomb,’ in the United States.” The statement continued: “In apprehending A1 Muhajir as he sought entry into the 
United States, we have disrupted an unfolding terrorist plot to attack the United States by exploding a radioactive 
‘dirty bomb.’ Now, a radioactive ‘dirty bomb’ involves exploding a conventional bomb that not only kills victims in 
the immediate vicinity, but also spreads radioactive material that is highly toxic to humans and can cause mass death 
and injury. From information available to the United States government, we know that Abdullah A1 Muhajir is an 
A1 Qaeda operative and was exploring a plan to build and explode a radioactive dirty bomb. Let me be clear: We 
know from multiple independent and corroborating sources that Abdullah A1 Muhajir was closely associated with A1 
Qaeda and that as an A1 Qaeda operative he was involved in planning future terrorist attacks on innocent American 
civilians in the United States. . . .1 commend the FBI, the CIA and other agencies involved in capturing Abdullah A1 
Muhajir before he could act on his deadly plan.” See Transcript of the Attorney General John Ashcroft Regarding 
the Transfer of Abdullah A1 Muhajir (Bom Jose Padilla) to the Department of Defense as an Enemy Combatant, on 
June 10, 2002. 

1318 See Intelligence Community review of the Tall Buildings plotting included in CIA records with references to 
terrorist attacks in Russia in September 1999 against apartment buildings using traditional explosives and VBIEDs. 
See also U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives report entitled, “Use of 
Natural Gas as a Terrorist Weapon in Apartment Buildings,” dated August 4, 2008. 

1319 The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that the CIA “concluded early on” that the “dirty bomb” plot was 

“never operationally viable.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “it took [the CIA] until 2007” to stop citing 
the “dirty bomb” plot in its representations about the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
This is incorrect. The CIA referred to the disruption of this plotting in a representation to the Department of Justice 
in July 2007, in representations to Congress in late October 2007, and confirmed this information to the press in 
April 2009. See CIA fax from CIA employee [REDACTED] to U.S. Senate Committee on Appropriations, 
Subcommittee on Defense, with fax cover sheet entitled, “Talking points,” sent on October 26, 2007, at 5:39:48 PM. 
Document faxed entitled, “Talking Points Appeal of the Million reduction in CIA/CTC’s Rendition and 

Detention Program.” See also the July 20, 2007, Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) memorandum, which states that 
“interrogations of Zubaydah — again, once enhanced techniques were employed — revealed two al-Qaeda operatives 
already in the United States and planning to destroy a high rise apartment building and to detonate a radiological 
bomb in Washington, D.C.” (italics added). As described elsewhere in this summary and in the full Committee 
Study, on April 21, 2009, in response to the partial declassification of OLC memoranda that month, a CIA 
spokesperson confirmed the CIA stood by the “factual assertions” in the OLC memoranda. See “Waterboarding 
Saved L.A.,” Washington Times, April 25, 2009. The CIA’s June 2013 Response further states “[d]espite the 
imprecision of our language, we continue to assess it was a good example of the importance of intelligence derived 



Page 231 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP RE G RET// 



// NOFORN 



Prior to the capture of Abu Zubaydah on March 28, 2002, the CIA 
was alerted to the threat posed by Jose Padilla. In early 2001, U.S. government records indicated 
that a Jose Padilla came to the U.S. Consulate in Karachi to report a lost passport. These records 
indicated that Jose Padilla provided a “sketchy” story about overstaying his Pakistani visa and 
that he was “allegedly studying Islamic law in Egypt.” A search of the State Department’s 
Consular Lookout and Support System was conducted at the time, which resulted in “multiple” 
hits for “Jose Padilla.” 1320 State Department records confirmed that Jose Padilla had sought a 
new passport at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi in February 2001, and was subsequently provided 
with a replacement on March 21, 2001. 1321 

On December 15, 2001, the CIA provided the FBI with documents 
obtained in Afghanistan from a purported al-Qa’ida-related safe house. Included in the binder 
were 180 terrorist training camp application forms entitled, “Mujahideen Identification Form / 
New Applicant Form.” An application form for a then 33-year-old individual with the alias 
“Abu Abdullah al-Muhajir” from “America” was among the forms. “Al-Muhajir’s” form — dated 
July 24, 2000 — listed other identifying information, to include a “10/18/70” date of birth; 
language skills to include English, Spanish, and Arabic; travels to Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and 
Yemen; and the individual’s marital status. 1322 



from the detainee program.” As described in this summary and throughout the full Committee Study, in its efforts to 
obtain legal authorization and policy approval for the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the CIA represented 
that the intelligence referenced was obtained “as a result” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques (not the 
“detainee program”), and that the information obtained was unique and otherwise unavailable. 

1320 The Consular Lookout and Support System (CLASS) is used by State Department passport agencies, post, and 
border inspection agencies to perform name checks on visa and passport applicants to identify individuals who are . 
ineligible for issuance or require other special action. Source: www.state.gov 

1321 A February 16, 2001, email entitled, “Lost passport case- Jose Padilla,” states that a “Jose Padilla,” with a date 
of birth of October 18, 1970, came to the U.S. Consulate in Karachi to report a lost passport. The email notes that 
“his story is really-sketchy-been traveling here long enough to overstay his Pakistani visa, but speaks no Urdu, and 
is allegedly studying Islamic law in Egypt.” A March 5, 2001, email in CIA records, entitled, “The continuing Jose 
Padilla saga!” states that there are “multiple CLASS hits” (Consular Lookout and Support System) for a Jose 
Padilla. The author writes “[REDACTED] and I both agree there is something sketchy about the guy.” On March 
21, 2001, State Department records indicate that Jose Padilla was provided with a replacement passport. See 
documents included in materials provided by the CIA to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, including 
email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]: cc: [REDACTED]; subject: “Lost passport case- Jose Padilla”; date: 
February 16, 2001, at 4:46 AM, included in materials provided by the CIA to the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence; second email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: “The continuing 
Jose Padilla saga!”; date: March 5, 2001, at 10:09 AM; U.S. State Department travel records identified by the 
Department of Justice; letter from Paul Wolfowitz, U.S. Department of Defense, to James Comey, U.S. Department 
of Justice, dated May 28, 2004. 

1322 Italics added. Jose Padilla’s fingerprints would later be found on the forms. See Jose Padilla U.S. court 
documents, which include the pledge form and a translation of the pledge form. See also FBI Washington 101514Z 
'10APR 07), “Summary Chronology of I ntelligence on Jose Padilla,” and email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

|; subject: “Pakistan Raid Evidence- Meeting with FBI SA in Pakistan at the 
time”; date: July 17, 2007, at 01 :07 PM, which notes the raids recovered a copy of “Padilla’s Muj pledge form.” See 
also numerous open source articles, to include, “CIA Officer Testifies He Was Given Qaeda ‘Pledge Form’ Said to 
be Padilla’s,” New York Times, dated May 16, 2007; “Key Padilla evidence got to CIA in Afghan pickup, ” 
Associated Press, March 28, 2007; and "Terror Suspect’s Path from Streets to Brig, ” New York Times, dated April 
24, 2004. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the CIA could not locate information on this form in CIA 
databases. According to testimony of a CI A officer at Jose Padilla’s federal trial , the binder and other material were 

mi 1 1 1 1 i i i"i "i i 

Page 232 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



On April 10, 2002, the CIA disseminated a cable with intelligence 
derived from the exploitation of documents obtained during the raids in which Abu Zubaydah 
was captured. Included in the CIA cable is a translation of a letter from mid-March 2002 that 
references a 33-year-old English-speaking individual. The cable states that the CIA believed this 
individual might be involved in “a martyrdom operation.” The translation disseminated states: 
“There is a brother from Argentina, he speaks Spanish, English and Arabic, he is 33 years old, he 
is married and has two little children. He is a great brother. He knows business and studies 
English language. He trains [in] self defense, he is a good looking man.” 1323 

The next day, April 1 1, 2002, the CIA was provided with 
information from Pakistani officials on a 33-year-old U.S. citizen named “Jose Padilla,” with a 
date of birth of October 18, 1970, who was briefly detained by Pakistani officials on April 4, 
2002. The Pakistani government provided a copy of Jose Padilla’s U.S. passport and relayed that 
Jose Padilla had overstayed his travel visa, a nd that there w ere inconsistencies with Jose 
Padilla’s appearance and accent. The CIA’s wrote that they would provide the 

information on “Jose Padilla” to the State Department’s Regional Security Officer, and “would 
follow-up with [Pakistani officials] on this matter.” 1324 The date of birth and travel information 
included with Jose Padilla’s passport matched information on the “Mujahideen Identification 
Form” (33-year-old “American” referenced as “Abu Abdullah al-Muhajir”) the CIA had 
provided to the FBI on December 15, 2001. 1325 



^NF^Or^pril 12, 2002, Pakistani officials provided additional 
information to the CIA’s HBHK specifically that they had detained a U.S. passport holder 
named Jose Padilla and a British passport holder named “Fouad Zouaoui” (later identified as 
B inyam Muhammad), who had suspiciously attempted to depart Pakistan. According to the CIA 
cable, Pakistani authorities provided the information on the pair “due to concerns about possible 
terrorist activity.” 1326 The cable noted that Pakistani authorities had to release Padilla, but that 
Padilla’s associate remained in detention. 1327 (When questioned further, the Pakistani authorities 



provided by a CIA source to CIA officers in Kandahar, Afghanistan. The CIA officer testified at Jose Padilla’s trial 
that, after he sorted through the material, the blue binder was placed in a sealed box and provided to the FBI in 
Islamabad, Pakista n. See referenced open source reporting. 

(102327Z APR 02) 

10972 (12031Z APR 02). As noted, the State Department already possessed information of concern 
related to Jose Padilla. 

1325 See Jose Padilla U.S. court documents, which include the pledge form and a translation of the pledge form. See 
also FBI Washington 101514Z (10APR 07), “Summary Chronology of Intelligence on Jose Padilla,” and email 



1323 ALEC 

1324 



from: [REDACTED]; to: 



|; subject: “Pakistan Raid Evidence- Meeting with 



FBI SA in Pakistan at the time”; date: July 17, 2007, at 01 :07 PM, which notes the raids recovered a copy of 
“Padilla’s Muj pledge form”; and numerous open source articles, to include, “CIA Officer Testifies He Was Given 
Qa eda ‘Pledge Form’ Said to be Padilla’s,” New York Times , dated May 16, 2007. 

10976 (120948Z APR 02). The official cable states that the Pakistani official and his office “has not 
received the full details, and he is passing this onto [the CIA] m due to concerns about possible terrorist activity.” 
The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the reporting from the Pakistani government that a Pakistan-based U.S. 
citizen named Jose Padilla was engaged in possible terrorist activity was “unremarkable at the time,” and that the 
CIA viewed the report as a “routine ‘illegal traveler’” report. 

1327 1 



10972 ( 1 203 1Z APR 02); 

TOP SECRET/ 



10976 ( 120948Z APR 02) 




/NOFORN 



Page 233 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



stated that they suspected Jose Padilla of being “an al-Qa’ida member.”) 1328 The information 
identifyin^os^Padilla and “Fouad Zouaoui” as potential terrorists had been provided by the 
CIA’s to CIA Headquarters, several CIA Stations, and the State Department’s 

Regional Security Officer (RSO) in Karachi by April 12, 2002. 1329 Using the identifying^ 
information in Jose Padilla’s passport, provided by th e Paki stani government , the CIA’s 

requested that CIA Headquarters and the CIA’s Station conduct (a 

database search) using th^iam^Jose Padilla” and the other identifying information 

provided. 1330 The CIA’s requested that CIA Headquarters and the CIA’s 

Station do the same for Padilla’s associate, Fouad Zouaoui. 1331 As a result, by April 12, 2002, 
the CIA was already alerted that a named U.S. citizen, “Jose Padilla,” had spent significant time 
in Pakistan and was engaged in “possible terrorist activity.” 1332 



Eight days after the CIA was informed that U.S. citizen Jose 
Padilla was engaged in “possible terrorist activity,” on the evening of April 20, 2002, Abu 
Zubaydah told FBI special agents about two men who approached him with a plan to detonate a 
uranium-based explosive device in the United States (the “dirty bomb”). Abu Zubaydah stated 
he did not believe the plan was viable and did not know the true names of the two individuals, 
but did provide physical descriptions of the pair. 1333 This information was acquired after Abu 
Zubaydah was confronted with emails that indicated Abu Zubaydah had sent two individuals to 
KSM. 1334 The FBI special agents who acquired this information from Abu Zubaydah believed it 
was provided as a result of rapport-building interrogation techniques. 1335 Abu Zubaydah would 



1331 

1332 



1328 See DIRECTOR IHH (162003Z FEB 03), which details a follow-up exchange between flHHHH 

per sonnel and P akistani officials. 

1329 10972 (12031Z APR 02); ■■■ 10976 (120948Z APR 02) 

1330 There were no records identified to indicate that the CIA informed the FBI at this time that U.S. citizen “Jose 
Padilla” was engaged in “possible terrorist activity.” As described in Volume II, once alerted, the FBI identified 
links between Jose Padilla and FBI counterterrorism subjects, including an individual who reportedly paid for Jose 
Pad illa’s travel to Pakistan to attend a terr orist training camp. 

1 0972 ( 1 203 1 Z APR 02) ; §■■■ 1 0976 ( 1 20948Z APR 02) 

10976 (120948Z APR 02). See additional reporting in the Volume II intelligence ch ronoloj 

1333 Abu Zubaydah provided the names of the individuals as Talha al-Kini and Abdallah al-Muhajir (|~ 
10090(210703ZAPR02))^^^^^^ 

1334 10063 (isosisz apr 02); ■■■■ 10096 

APR 02) 

1335 See FBI communications to FBI Headquarters in April 2002, as well as May 13, 2009, Senate Judiciary 

Committee testimony of FBI Special Agent Ali Soufan on the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah. In the CIA’s June 
2013 Response, the CIA states the CIA’s representation that Abu Zubaydah provided the information after the “use 
of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques” was accurate because, “Abu Zubaydah revealed this 
information after having been subjected to sleep deprivation, which would be categorized as an enhanced 
interrogation technique once the program was officially underway.” As described in detail in the Abu Zubaydah 
detainee review in Volume III, when Abu Zubaydah was discharged from a hospital in Country |, the CIA sought to 
deprive Abu Zubaydah of sleep and to cease Abu Zubaydah’s interaction with the FBI special agents who had been 
interviewing Abu Zubaydah and acquiring information from him at the hospital. Days later, after this new CIA 
approach was implemented, the CIA reversed this decision and the FBI was allowed to question Abu Zubaydah 
again. Further, the use of sleep deprivation during this period differed from future uses of sleep deprivation and had 
ceased by the time of the referenced FBI interview, as the CIA had deter mined that A bu Zubaydah’s ability to focus 
onquestions and provide coherent answers appeared compromised. ( See 10071 (190827Z APR 02) and 

flBMM 101 16 (250731Z APR 02).) Ali Soufan testified that Abu Zubaydah provided information about the 
“Dirty Bomb” plot only after he (Soufan) re-initiated a more traditional interrogation approach with Abu Zubaydah, 
stating, “We then returned to using the Inf ormed Interrogation Approach. Withi n a few hours, Abu Zubaydah again 

TOP SECRE T//B^|MWMBBBB^Q4QFQRN 

Page 234 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFGR N 



not be subjected to the “use of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques” until August 
2002, more than three months later. 1336 

(TS^H^^^^^^H#NF)^Yithin two hours of the dissemination of this information, CIA 
officersHH[|^^^mi||||^| sent cables to CIA Headquarters and select CIA Stations 
calling attention to the similarities between Abu Zubaydah’s reporting and their request from 
April 12, 2002, for information on Jose Padilla and Fouad Zouaoui, which had not yet been acted 
upon by the receiving offices. 1337 A travel alert was then initiated for Jose Padilla based on the 
previous information provided by the Pakistani government. Padilla was located and 
unknowingly escorted back to the United States by an FBI special agent on May 8, 2002. 1338 
Upon his arrival in the United States Padilla was found to be carrying $10,526 in U.S. currency, 
an amount he failed to report. 1339 Padilla was interviewed and taken into FBI custody on a 



started talking and gave us important actionable intelligence. This included the details of Jose Padilla, the so-called 
‘dirty bomber.”’ (See Senate Judiciary Testimony, transcript at: 

http://judiciary.senate.gov/hearings/testimony.cfm?id=38428wit_id=7906.) The assertion in the CIA’s June 2013 
Response is incongruent with additional CIA records. See senior CIA analyst comments on the draft CIA Inspector 
General Special Review from February 10, 2004, stating: “Padilla and the dirty bomb plot was prior to enhanced and 
he never really gave us actionable intel to get them”; CIA draft response to Committee Questions for the Record 
concerning an OLC memorandum suggesting that information on Jose Padilla was acquired from Abu Zubaydah 



after enhanced interrogation techniques, with the CIA response stating that the CIA’s 



|CTC Legal “[] 



simply inadvertently reported this wrong. Abu Zubaydah provided information on Jose Padilla while 



being interrogated by the FBI 10091)”; CIA testimony from CIA Director Hayden on April 12, 2007, 

stating, “In August 2002, CIA began using these few and lawful interrogation techniques in the interrogation of Abu 
Zubaydah”; and the CIA-vetted speech by President Bush on September 6, 2006. See also SSCI Staff interview of 
FBI Special Agent Ali Soufan, April 28, 2008, at 1:20 PM, Hart Senate Office Building (Ali Soufan: “So we went 
back. And we start talking to him. We took some Coke, tea, and we start talking about different tilings. We flipped 



him about different things, 



And then he came back to his senses and he started 



| and I and [REDACTED], 
cooperating again. And this is when he gave us Padilla.”) (DTS #2008-241 1). 

1336 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III that details how, after Department of Justice approval in 
August 2002, the CIA began using the CI A’s enhance d interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah on August 4, 
2002^ncludin^di^ , aterboard. See 10644 (201235Z AUG 02); and email from: [REDACTED]; 

to: and [redacted]; subject: “Re: So it begins ”; date: August 4, 2 002, at 09:45 AM. 



1337 




(220238Z APR 02); 



1 1041 (220802Z 



APR 02); and 



11036 (22 0348Z APR 02). See also ALEC 
11042 (220921 Z APR 02). 

1338 Among other documents, see letter from the CIA addressed to SSCI Staff Director A1 Cumming, dated June 24, 
2002, and entitled, “Arrest of Jose Padilla.” After being detained in Pakistan, B inyam Mohammad was rendered by 



the CIA 




jovernment. On Januar 



30586 




HHHHH July 2002, where he wa s held | 

2004, Binyam Mo hammad was transfer red to CIA custody | 

|l630||^HHIB 

1339 Fax from Pat Rowan, Department of Justice National Security Division to [REDACTED], at CTC Legal, on 
August 15, 2007 with subject line: “Jose Padilla,” includes a Department of Justice memorandum that is based 
primarily on 29 lIRs of the joint FBI-military interrogations of Padilla disseminated from May 5, 2003, to July 9, 
2003, a FBI document “Jose Padilla Debrief Summary, August 29, 2003,” the FBI’s 302s on Padilla (5/8/02) and 
Binyam Muhammad (6/4/02), an FBI EC on Padilla (5/14/02); a CIA Statement Summarizin^ignificant 
Information about Jose Padilla of 8 June 02 [‘CIA Summary’]; a DIA Info Memo from HHIH (1 1/13/03); and 
an FBI LHM “Jose Padilla Debrief Status” (11/11/03). See also SSCI Transcript “Detention of Jose Padilla,” dated 
June 12, 2002 (DTS #2002-2603). 

Illl I I III I I llll I III I' 

Page 235 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



material witness warrant. 1340 The exploitation of Jose Padilla’s pocket litter 1341 and phone 
revealed significant connections to known terrorists, including subjects of FBI terrorism 
investigations in the United States. 1342 

I n separate debriefings, Padilla and his associate, B inyam 
Mohammed, maintained they had no intention of engaging in terrorist plotting, but proposed the 
“Dirty Bomb” plot in order to depart Pakistan, avoid combat in Afghanistan, and return 
home. 1343 

Over several years CIA officers identified errors in the CIA’s 
representations concerning the “effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in 
relation to the Abu Zubaydah reporting pertaining to Jose Padilla and Padilla’s alleged plotting. 
Iin^sponse to one such representation, the chief of the Abu Zubaydah Task Force wrote to Hf 
HHICTC Legal in 2002 that “AZ’s info alone would never have allowed us to find [Jose 
Padilla and Binyam Mohammed].” 1344 In 2004, she sought to correct inaccurate CIA 
representations again, telling colleagues: 



1340 CIA Notification, “Arrest of Jose Padilla,” dated June 24, 2002 (DTS #2002-2866); WHDC ■■ (242226Z 
MAR 03). Discusses information obtained by FBI officials on March 20, 2003, and SSCI Transcript “Staff Briefing 
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation on the Detention of Jose Padilla,” dated June 1 1, 2002 (DTS #2002-2598). 

1341 Pocket litter refers to material acquired on a person upon a search and may include notes, identification cards, 
tickets, phone numbers, computer files, photographs, or any other material in the person’s possession. 

1342 See CIA Document, Subject “CIA Statement Summarizing Significant Information About Jose Padilla {21:10 



hrs.- 8 June 02},” email from [REDACTED] to 



| on August 2, 2002, at 3:54:17 PM, with the 



subject line: “Re: Padilla’s travel history,” and fax from Pat Rowan, Department of Justice National Security 
Division to [REDACTED], at CIA CTC Legal, on August 15, 2007, with subject line: “Jose Padilla.” The fax 
includes a Department of Justice memorandum that is based primarily on 29 IIRs of the joint FBI-military 
interrogations of Padilla disseminated from May 5, 2003, to July 9, 2003, a FBI document “Jose Padilla Debrief 
Summary, August 29, 2003,” the FBI’s 302s on Padilla (5/8/02) and Binyam Muhammad (6/4/02), an FBI EC on 
Padilla (5/14/02); a CIA Statement Summarizing Significant Information about Jose Padilla of 8 June 02 [‘CIA 
Summary’]; a DIA Info Memo from (1 1/13/03); and an FBI LHM “Jose Padilla Debrief Status” 

(11/1 1/03). See also SSCI transcript “Detention of Jose Padilla,” dated June 12, 2002 (DTS #2002-2603), in which 
the CIA informs the SSCI that, based on his address book confiscated in Padilla “did have connections 

to Islamic extremists, both within the United States and outside the U.S.” 

1343 See Department of Justice memorandum referenced in chronology in Volume II that is based primarily on 29 
IIRs of the joint FBI-military interrogations of Padilla disseminated from May 5, 2003, to July 9, 2003; a FBI 
document “Jose Padilla Debrief Summary, August 29, 2003,” the FBI’s 302s on Padilla (5/8/02) and Binyam 
Muhammad (6/4/02), an FBI EC on Padilla (5/14/02); a CIA Statement Summarizing Significant Information about 



(11/13/03); and an FBI LHM “Jose 



Jose Padilla of 8 June 02 [‘CIA Summary’]; a DIA Info Memo ffom| 
Padilla Debrief Status” (1 1/1 1/03)^^^^^^^^^^ 

1344 See CIA memorandum from: t< 



I; subject: “AZ info rmation ”; date: 

July 10, 2002 , at 01:18:50 PM. See also February 10, 2004, eiiiai^om^^^riH^|||^|||; to: HH 

|; cc: [redacted], [redacted], [redacted], [redacted], ^^^^^^^^ft john P. Mudd, [R EDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], subject: Please 

Read - Re CTC Response to the Draft IG Report; date: February 10, 2004. In a SSCI transcript dated June 12, 
2002, entitled, “Detention of Jose Padilla” (DTS #2002-2603), the CIA acknowledged it had information on Jose 
Padilla prior to reporting from Abu Zubaydah. A CIA officer stated: “the Pakistani liaison felt it was important to 
bring [Padilla] to our attention, given the recent raids... there was enough information indicating that his travel was 
suspicious, to put us on alert. This suspicion was enhanced during the debriefings of Abu Zubaydah, which 
occurred on 21 April.” This is the only known CIA representation that did not fully attribute information on Jose 
Padilla to CIA interrogations. 

mi m iii 

Page 236 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP S ECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



“AZ never really gave ‘this is the plot’ type of information. He claimed every 
plot/operation he had knowledge of and/or was working on was only 
preliminary. (Padilla and the dirty bomb plot was prior to enhanced and he 
never really gave us actionable intel to get them).” 1345 

In October 2005, the chief of CTC’s CBRN (Chemical, 
Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear) Group wrote, under the heading, “Don’t Put All Your 
Uranium in One Bucket”: 



“Jose Padilla: we’ll never be able to successfully expunge Padilla and the 
‘dirty bomb’ plot from the lore of disruption, but once again I’d like to go on 
the record that Padilla admitted that the only reason he came up with so-called 
‘dirty bomb’ was that he wanted to get out of Afghanistan and figured that if 
he came up with something spectacular, they’d finance him. Even KSM says 
Padilla had a screw loose. He’s a petty criminal who is well- versed in US 
criminal justice (he’s got a rap sheet as long as my arm). Anyone who believes 
you can build an lND or RDD by ‘putting uranium in buckets and spinning 
them clockwise over your head to separate the uranium’ is not going to 
advance al-Qa’ida’s nuclear capabilities.” 1346 

(T$//^^HHH|ty/NF) CIA and other U.S. government assessments also called into 
question the “Tall Buildings” plotting, which was loosely based on attacks that were conducted 
in Moscow in September 1999 using conventional explosives. The “Tall Buildings” plotting did 
not envision the use of conventional explosives. 1347 Instead, the plotting envisioned using 
natural gas to destroy high-rise residential buildings. As planned, the Intelligence Community 
assessed the plotting was not viable. 1348 An August 4, 2008, U.S. government assessment stated: 
“On the surface, the idea is simplistic, if not amateurish... the probability of an efficient fuel air 
explosion is low.” 1349 

(TS^^^^^^^^^H^NF) Jose Padilla was detained on a material witness warrant from May 
8, 2002, to June 9, 2002, when he was transferred to U.S. military custody and designated an 
“enemy combatant.” On January 3, 2006, Jose Padilla was transferred to U.S. law enforcement 



to: 



WKKM’ cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
|, John P. Mudd [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], Jose Rodriguez, 
|; subject: Please Read — Re CTC Response to the Draft IG 



1345 E ma i[ f r om: 

[REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], | 

Report; date: February 10, 2004. 

1346 See email from: [REDACTED] C/CTC/OTA/CBRNG/RNTB; to: multiple recipients; subject: “Re: Urgent: 
Unclassified Fact Sheet for David Shedd”; date: October 6, 2005, at 04:35 PM. 

1347 See additional details in Volume II. 

1348 See Intelligence Community review of the Tall Buildings plotting included in CIA records with references to 
terrorist attacks in Russia in September 1999 against apartment buildings using traditional explosives and VBIEDs. 

1349 See Intelligence Community review of the Tall Buildings plotting included in CIA records with references to 
terrorist attacks in Russia in September 1999 against apartment buildings using traditional explosives and VBIEDs. 
See also U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives report entitled, “Use of 
Natural Gas as a Terrorist Weapon in Apartment Buildings,” dated August 4, 2008. The latter document states that: 
“If the idea of the plot is to cause death and destruction on the same scale as had occurred in Russia, then Padilla’s 
methodology comes into question. The probability of causing this magnitude of death and destruction using natural 
gas [versus conventional explosives] woul d be considerably lower.” 

TOP SECRE T//|^BBB^BBBM^NOFORN 

Page 237 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



custody and tried in federal court. On August 16, 2007, Jose Padilla and two co-defendants, 
Adham Hassoun and Kifah Jayyousi, were found guilty of three criminal offenses relating to 
terrorist support activities from October 1993 to November 1, 2001. 1350 The case against Jose 
Padilla centered on his attendance at a terrorist training camp in Afghanistan in the fall of 
2000 — specifically, the terrorist training camp application form acquired by the CIA and 
provided to the FBI in December 2001. The form was found to have Jose Padilla’s fingerprints, 
as well as identifying data to include his date of birth, languages spoken, and travels. 1351 On 
January 22, 2008, Jose Padilla was sentenced to 17 years in prison. On September 19, 201 1, the 
U.S. 1 1 th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled the sentence was too lenient in part because it did not 
take in account Jose Padilla’s prior criminal offenses. 1352 

After be ing detained in Pakistan, Jose Padilla’s associate Binyam 
Mohammad was rendered by the CIAH^^^I on July I- 2002, where he was held by the 
government. On January B>2004~Binyam Mohammad was rendered to CIA 
custody. 1353 On May |, 2004, Binyam Mohammad was transferred to the custody of the U.S. 
military in Bagram, Afghanistan. 1354 On September 21, 2004, he was transferred to Guantanamo 

Bay, Cuba. 1355 Binyam Mohammad was then transferred from U.S. military custody to the 

UnimcnKingdxm 23, 2009. 

HHHHHHB- 1356 Lawyers representing Binyam Mohammad sued the government 
of the United Kingdom to compel the release of documents relating to his whereabouts and 
treatment after his initial detention in April 2002. 1357 In February 2010, a British court 
compelled the release “of a summary of the torture” to which Binyam Mohammed was subjected 



1350 ALEC ^^■(Mayl^2002), with references to FBI WASH 1503 1 5Z, | 
from 200 1 , Jose Padilla’s arrest, Padilla was fo und to be in 

number of Adham Hassoun, 



ancl CIA reporting 
jossession of the phone 



|; and providing material support to terrorists. U.S. prosecutors focused on more 
than 70 intercepted phone calls between the defendants during the 1990s, but provided no information at the trial 
related to plotting in the United States. See U.S. District Criminal Court Docket, Florida Southern, for defendants, 
including Jose Padilla, as well as open source news reports, including “Without a plot, is Padilla guilty?,” Christian 
Science Monitor, dated July 19, 2007; and “The others on trial in Padilla case,” Christian Science Monitor , dated 
May 29, 2007. 

1351 An Assistant U.S. Attorney involved in the prosecution stated, “The narrative is fairly clear that Padilla was 
recruited to go overseas to participate in jihad.” See U.S. District Criminal Court Docket, Florida Southern, for 
defendants, including Jose Padilla, as well as open source news reports, including “Without a plot, is Padilla 
guilty?,” Christian Science Monitor, dated July 19, 2007; and “The others on trial in Padilla case,” Christian Science 
Monitor, dated May 29, 2007. 

1352 See open sources, to include press articles such as, “Court Says Padilla Prison Sentence Too Lenient,” Reuters, 
date^Septemberl9, 2011. 

1353 630 HHHHBI 

1354 ^ 

1355 mB^H^^^|l2520 (281 655Z SEP 04) 

1356 Terrorism Watch, March 10, 2009, Guantanamo Detainee's Torture Claims Could Impact Bilateral Relationship 
with UK. 

1357 [REDACTED] 3174 (311725ZJUL 0 8) 

nil ii in i 

Page 238 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQF Q RN 



during his detention. In the fall of 2010, the British government awarded Binyam Mohammed a 
reported £1 million in compensation. 1358 

2. The Thwarting of the Karachi Plots 



Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and necessary to produce critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, 
which enabled the CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture terrorists, and save lives. Over a period 
of years, the CIA provided the thwarting of the Karachi Plot(s) as evidence for the effectiveness 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. These CIA representations were inaccurate. 

The Karachi Plot(s) was disrupted with the confiscation of explosives and the arrests of Ammar 
al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash in April 2003. The operation and arrests were conducted 
unilaterally by Pakistani authorities and were unrelated to any reporting from the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. 

Further Details: The Karachi Plot(s) refers to terrorist plotting that 
targeted a variety of U.S. and Western interests in the Karachi area, to include the U.S. 

Consulate, named hotels near the airport and beach, U.S. vehicles traveling between the 
Consulate and the airport, U.S. diplomatic housing, U.S. personnel subject to potential sniper 
attacks, as well as Pakistan’s Faisal Army Base. 1359 CIA records indicate the CIA became aware 
of the initial plotting as early as September 2002, and that it was disrupted in April 2003, when 
the remaining plot leaders were arrested in a unilateral operation by Pakistani authorities. 1360 
While the plot leaders were captured in the process of procuring explosives, they maintained that 
they were still in the process of locating vehicles, a safe house, and suicide operatives at the time 
of their arrest. 1361 



The thwarting of the Karachi Plot(s) is one of the eight most 
frequently cited examples provided by the CIA as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 1362 Over a period of years, CIA documents prepared for and 
provided to senior policymakers, intelligence officials, and the Department of Justice represent 
the Karachi Plot(s) as an example of how “[k]ey intelligence collected from HVD interrogations 
after applying interrogation techniques” had “enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots” and capture 



1358 Among other open sources, see “Compensation to Guantanamo detainees ‘was necessary,’” BBC News UK, 
November 16, 2010. 



1359 



See intelligence chronology in Volume II and 




11454 (3017102Z APR 03). 



■^■1 45028 
MAY 03) and DIRECTOR 



33804 (19095 6Z SEP 02); [REDACTED] 34513 (052246Z MAR 03); 

|; DIRECTOR __ 

1361 See intelligen ce chronology in Volume II, including DIRECTOR HH 

MAY 03). 

1362 The Karachi terrorist plots encompassed a variety of potential targets in the Karachi area associated with U.S. 
and Western interests. Although the plotting involved multiple targets, the plotting is most often referred to as the 
“Karachi Plot.” 

Page 239 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP S ECRET// 



//NOFORN 



additional terrorists. 1363 The CIA further represented that the intelligence acquired from the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “otherwise unavailable” and “saved lives.” 1364 



1363 Italics included in CIA Memorandum to the Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” from March 2, 2005. See also CIA talking points for National Security 
Council entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DCI Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee 
Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques,” dated March 4, 2005. 

1364 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see : 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 
“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. .. .As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[tjermination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” {See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘ElTs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” ( See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” {See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “IDCI^Briefin^i^DJ^rogram^g^da, CIA document “EITs and 

mi mi in —j 

Page 240 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




For example, in November 2007, the CIA prepared and provided a 
set of talking points to the CIA director for an “upcoming meeting with the President regarding 
the Waterboard Enhanced Interrogation Technique.” 1365 The document includes a section 
entitled, “Plots Discovered as a Result of EITs,” which states “reporting statistics alone will not 
provide a fair and accurate measure of the effectiveness of EITs.” The document then provides a 
list of “Key Intelligence Derived through use of EITs,” stating: 

“CIA’s use of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of a 
comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist 
plots... The following are examples of key intelligence collected from CIA 
detainee interrogations after applying the waterboard along with other 
interrogation techniques: . . .The Karachi Plot: This plan to conduct attacks 
against the US Consulate and other US interests in Pakistan was uncovered 
during the initial interrogations ofKhallad Bin Attash and Ammar al-Baluchi 
and later confirmed by KSM .” 1366 

Likewise, a CIA-prepared briefing for Vice President Cheney on 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in March 2005, under a section of the briefing 
called, “INTERROGATION RESULTS,” asserts: 

“Use of DOJ-authorized enhanced interrogation techniques , as part of a 
comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled us to disrupt terrorist plots, 
capture additional terrorists. . .The Karachi Plot: Plan to conduct attacks 
against the US Consulate and other US interests in Pakistan. Plot disrupted. 



Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted .”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, 
which provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1365 On September 17, 2007, President Bush nominated Judge Michael Mukasey to be Attorney General of the 
United States. In October 2007, at his confirmation hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Mukasey 
declined to say whether he believed waterboarding as an interrogation technique was unlawful. On October 30, 
2007, Mukasey responded to written questions from the Senate Judiciary Committee on the issue of waterboarding, 
stating: “As described in your letter, these techniques seem over the line or, on a personal basis, repugnant to me, 
and would probably seem the same to many Americans. But hypotheticals are different from real life, and in any 
legal opinion the actual facts and circumstances are critical.” (See October 30, 2007, Letter from Michael B. 
Mukasey, to Senators Patrick J. Leahy, Edward M. Kennedy, Joseph R. Biden, Jr., Herb Kohl, Dianne Feinstein, 
Russell D. Feingold, Charles E. Schumer, Richard J. Durbin, Benjamin L. Cardin, and Sheldon Whitehouse.) On 
November 6, 2007, days prior to a Senate vote to confirm Mukasey, the CIA provided a set of talking points to the 
CIA director for use with the President in a meeting about the CIA’s use of the waterboard interrogation technique. 
See document entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, with the 
notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 

1366 Italics added. See document entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 
6, 2007, with the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 




Page 241 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Sources: Khallad Bin Attash, Ammar al-Baluchi. KSM also provided info on 
the plot after we showed him capture photos of Ammar and Khallad.” 1367 



The CIA provided similar inaccurate representations regarding the 
thwarting of the Karachi Plot(s) in 17 of the 20 documents provided to policymakers and the 
Department of Justice between July 2003 and March 2009. 1368 



(TS/^mi|||^^|//NF) A review of CIA operational cables and other documents found 
that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — to include the waterboard — played no role in 
the disruption of the Karachi Plot(s). CIA records indicate that the Karachi Plot(s) was thwarted 
by the arrest of operatives and the interdiction of explosives by Pakistani authorities, specifically 



1369 



The CIA had info rmati on regarding the K arachi terrorist p lotting as 
early as September 1 1, 2002. 1370 On that day, a raid conducted by HBflHfll 
Pakistani authorities^^^^^^^l^HMl^^^^^^^^l^^K of an al-Qaida safe house 
in Karachi, Pakistan, uncovered the “perfume letter,” named as such because the term 
“perfumes” is used as a code word. The letter, written in May 2002, was from KSM to Hamza 
al-Zubayr, a known al-Qa’ida member who was killed in the raids. 1371 KSM’s letter to al-Zubayr 
states, “Dear Brother, we have the green light for the hotels,” and suggests “making it three 
instead of one.” 1372 By early October 2002, the CIA had completed a search of the names 
identified in the “perfume letter” in its databases and found many of the individuals who “had 
assigned roles in support of the operation” were arrested by Pakistani authorities during the 



1367 Italics added. CIA briefing for Vice President Cheney, dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for Vice 
President Cheney: CIA Detention and Interrogation Program.” 

1368 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 
Volume II. 



1369 



45028 



The CIA’s June 2013 



and DIRECTOR 

Response concedes that the CIA “mischaracterized the impact of the reporting [the CIA] acquired from detainees on 
the Karachi plots,” and acknowledges that the Karachi plotting was “thwarted by the arrest of the operatives and the 
interdiction of explosives by [Pakistani authorities!.” The CIA does not dispute that Pakistani authorities arrested 
Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash independently, and that information from the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program played no role in the arrests. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states, however, that CIA 
detainee reporting “revealed ongoing attack plotting against the US official presence in Karachi that prompted the 
Consulate to take further steps to protect its officers.” This statement is incongruent with CIA records. In response 
to the reporting cited by the CIA, CIA personnel in Karachi wrote: “[wjhile reporting from both [al-Baluchi and bin 
Attash] was chilling- [CIA officers] had become aware of most of this reporting either through previous information 
or through interviews of al-Baluchi and [Khallad bin] Attash prior to their transfer out of Karachi.” The CIA 
personnel in Karachi further reassured addressees that, in December 2002, the U.S. Consulate in Karachi took 
increased steps to protect U.S. Consulate personnel. See Volume II for additional information. 

1370 For detailed information, see Volume II. 



1371 ALEC I 

1372 I 



(032142Z OCT 02) 
12535 (050557Z OCT 02); 

TOP SECRET// 



11050 (101207Z OCT 02 )j 

//NOFORN 

Page 242 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET // 



//NQF Q R N 



raids. 1373 At least one person in the letter, Khallad bin Attash, a known al-Qa’ida operative, 
remained at large. 1374 

What remained of the Karachi plotting was disrupted unilaterally 
by Pakistan i authorities as a result of a cr iminal lead. On April ■, 2003, Pakistani authorities, 
specifically received a repoit that explosives and weapons were to 

be transported in a pickup truck to a specific location in Karachi. 1375 Pakistani authorities made 
arrangements to intercede, and, on April 29, 2003, they intercepted the vehicle and confiscated 
explosives, detonators, and ammunition. The driver of the vehicle provided the location where 
the explosives were being delivered, leading to the capture of several operatives, including 
Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash, as well as to the discovery of another explosives 
cache. A third captured individual stated that the explosives had belonged to Hamza al-Zubayr, 
the known and now deceased al-Qa’ida operative, as well as others residing in the home raided 
on September 11, 2002, where the “perfume letter” was discovered. 1376 

While being arrested, Ammar al-Baluchi was asked by a Pakistani 
officer about his intentions regarding the seized explosives. Al-Baluchi responded that he was 
planning to attack the U.S. Consulate in Karachi. 1377 In foreign government custody — and prior 
to being rendered to CIA custody and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques — Ammar al-Baluchi continued to provide information about the Karachi plotting to a 
foreign government officer who was using rapport-building interrogation techniques. 1378 The 
information provided by Ammar al-Baluchi on the plotting included the surveillance conducted, 
the envisioned targets, and the exact method of attack that was considered for the U.S. Consulate 
in Karachi and other hard targets. Ammar al-Baluchi discussed the use of a motorcycle with a 
bomb to breach the perimeter wall of the consulate and then how the operatives would seek to 
exploit that breach with a vehicle filled with explosives. 1379 Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin 



1373 ALEC (0302054Z OCT 02). See also CIA paper dated January 11, 2002, entitled, “Threat Threads: 

Most 1 1 September Plotters Still Under the Radar.” 

1374 ALEC (0302054Z OCT 02). See also CIA paper dated January 1 1, 2002, entitled, “Threat Threads: 

Mos^^September Plotte^Stil^nder the Radar.” 

1375 ■■^45028 CIA records indicate the interdiction was the result of criminal leads and was 

unrelated to any reporting from CIA detainees. 




1 45028 DIRECTOR The CIA’s June 201 3 

Response maintains that KSM’s reporting on die thwarted “perfume letter” plotting was separate from the “plots 
disrupted with the arrest and interrogation of Ammar and Khallad.” Because CIA records did not make this 
distinction, and the fact that the operations, to at least some extent, shared targets, operatives, and the same set of 
exp losives, the oper ations are linked in this St udy. ___ 

1377 ■■■■45028 ■■■■■; DIRECTOR ■§ 

1378 Given the threat to U.S. interests, CIA officers sought to participate in the interrogations. A May 2, 2003, CIA 
cable ( See ^^m||l4291) states that, because of Ammar al-Baluchi ’s “strong reticence towards the U.S.,” CIA 
officers were observing the foreign government interrogations of Ammar al-Baluchi via video feed. The cable notes 
that a foreign government officer who had developed rapport with Ammar al-Baluchi was conducting all the 
questioning and obtaining intelligence from Ammar al-Baluchi on the plotting against U.S. interests in Pakistan, as 
well as other matters. 

1379 The CIA’s June 2013 Response claims that “Ammar and Khallad provided new information on other attack 
plans in Karachi after entering CIA custody and undergoing enhanced interrogation techniques,” and that “[djuring 
his first interrogation in CIA custody and after enhanced techniques commenced , [Ammar] revealed that the plan 

TOP SE€RE T//MBMB^^BB^M//NOEORN 

Page 243 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NOFORN 



Attash remained in foreign government custody for approximately H weeks, with Ammar al- 
Baluchi — and to a lesser extent bin Attash 1380 — responding to questions on a variety of matters, 
including the Karachi plotting. 1381 



On May 2003, Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash were 
rendered to CIA custody and immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 1382 The next day, the CIA disseminated two intelligence reports on the Karachi 
Plot(s) from the interrogations of Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash. 1383 The reporting 
relayed that: (1) al-Qa’ida was targeting Western interests in Karachi, including the U.S. 
Consulate and Western housing in a specific neighborhood of Karachi; and (2) the attack could 
have occurred as early as “late May /early June 2003,” but the plotters were still in the process of 
finding vehicles, a safe house, and the suicide operatives at the time of their arrest. 1384 These 
disseminated intelligence reports were used to support CIA representations in finished 
intelligence products, 1385 talking points, briefing documents, and President Bush’s September 6, 



was to use a motorcycle bomb and a car bomb in a single, coordinated attack at the end of May or early June, and he 
pointed to the location on the Consulate’s perimeter wall where the attack would occur.” The information in the 
CIA’s June 2013 Response is inaccurate. Ammar al-Baluchi provided the referenced information while in foreign 
government custody, prior to entering CIA custody and being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. Giventhethreat to U.S. interests, CIA officers sought to participate in the interrogations. A May 2, 
2003, CIA cable 1— I™ 



14291) states that, because of Ammar al-Baluchi ’s “strong reticence towards the 
U.S.,” CIA officers were observing the foreign government interrogations of Ammar al-Baluchi via video feed. The 
cable notes that a foreign government officer who had developed rapport with Ammar al-Baluchi was conducting all 
the questioning and obtaining intelligence from Ammar al-Baluchi. This included information about the 
motorcycle-car bomb plotting against the U.S. Consulate, as well as information on plans to potentially target 
Westerners in a specific housing area in Karachi. According to the information obtained, surveillance by the plotters 
“had confirmed a U.S. presence significant enough to warrant such an attack.” Ammar al-Baluchi further stated that 
he had considered caijacking a U.S. Consulate vehicle and loading it with explosives to target the Consulate, and 
elaborated on the initial idea to attack the U.S. Consulate with a helicopter, stating that he did not follow through 
with this idea because he believed it would take too long to train an operative for that type of attack ( see 
14291, May 2, 2003). Later, the foreign government officer described Ammar al-Baluchi as “more chatty” than 
Khallad bin Attash, and detailed how, while in foreign government custody Ammar al-Baluchi “acknowledged plans 
to attack U.S. Consulate officials at the airport, the Consul General’s Residence and the Consulate itself.” The 
foreign government officer explained that “both the Consulate and the CG’s residence” required a “tiered attack of 
successive car bombs which would breach the perimeter” of the targets. The foreign government officer also stated 
that, based on Ammar al-Baluchi’ s comments on his casing efforts, it was inferred that Ammar al-Baluchi had 



sought to target Americans at their residences in specific areas of Karachi. See \ 
04). 



19647 



APR 



1380 



14282 



Records indicate that Khallad bin Attash was less cooperative (Ammar 
al-Baluchi was described as “more chatty”), but nonetheless provided information in foreign government custody on 
the surveillance he conducted against United States government vehicles in Karachi, among other information. 



1381 



2003); 



145028 

19647 



: tea agains t 

flB 



iPR 03); 



14291 (May 2, 



lAPR 03); DIRECTOR 

|APR 04). CIA records indicate that Ammar al-Baluchi was providing 
significant information to the foreign government officer conducting the questioning who had developed rapport 
with Ammar al-Baluchi. 

1382 [REDACTE D] 3832 5 [REDACTE D] 38389 

1383 DIRECTOR (^^■MAY03); DIRECTOR 

1384 DIRECTOR (^^| MAY 03); DIRECTOR 

that Khallad bin Attash indicated that they had identified one suicide operative so far. 

1385 See CIA speech validation efforts for the President’s September 6, 2006, speech acknowledging the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. In the speech, President Bush stated that “Terrorists held in CIA custody... 
helped stop a planned attack on the U.S. c onsulate in Karachi using car bombs a nd motorcycle bombs.” See also, 

ini Mi in iiiumiim 

Page 244 of 499 




MAY 03) 
MAY 03). 



DIRECTOR 



noted 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



2006, speech that the Karachi Plot(s) was “thwarted,” “disrupted,” or “uncovered” as a result of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. However, within 24 hours of the dissemination of 
these intelligence reports, CIA personnel in Karachi responded in an official cable that the 
information acquired from the CIA detainees and disseminated was already known to the CIA 
and U.S. Consulate officials. The cable stated: 

“[w]hile reporting from both [al-Baluchi and bin Attash] was chilling- [CIA 
officers] had become aware of most of this reporting either through previous 
information or through interviews of al-Baluchi and [Khallad bin] Attash prior 
to their transfer out of Karachi.” 1386 

The CIA pers onnel in Karachi reassured addressees that, in 
December20027^^^||Bil|^^^HlH the U.S. Consulate in Karachi took increased steps to 
protect U.S. Consulate personnel based on similar terrorist threat reporting. According to the 
cable, Americans in the referenced housing area had already been vacated from the “area for 
several months,” the potential for “attacks targeting Americans at the airport” had been 
“recognized several months ago,” and new procedures and security measures had been put in 
place to minimize the risks associated with the potential terrorist attacks. 1387 

As noted, in November 2007, the CIA prepared and provided a set 
of talking points to the CIA director for an “upcoming meeting with the President regarding the 
Waterboard Enhanced Interrogation Technique.” Under a section entitled, “Plots Discovered as 
a Result of EITs,” the document lists the “Karachi Plot,” stating the disruption was the result of 
“key intelligence collected from CIA detainee interrogations after applying the waterboard along 
with other interrogation techniques,” and that the plotting was “ uncovered during the initial 
interrogations of Khallad Bin Attash and Ammar al-Baluchi and later confirmed by KSM.” 1388 
While Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash were subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, there are no CIA records to indicate that either was ever subjected to 
the CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique. KSM did provide information on the plotting, but 
was assessed by CIA personnel to be withholding information on the plotting, more than a month 
after the CIA stopped using its enhanced interrogation techniques against KSM. In late April 
2003, CIA interrogators confronted KSM with photographs demonstrating that Ammar al- 



among other documents, the June 2005 CIA Intelligence Assessment entitled, “Detainee Reporting Pivotal for the 
War Against Al-Qa’ida.” CIA records indicate this document was provided to White House officials on June 1, 
2005. A slightly modified version of this Intelligence Assessment was broadly disseminated within the Intelligence 
Community on June 3, 2005. On March 31, 2009, former Vice President Cheney requested the declassification of 
this Intelligence Assessment, which was publicly released with redactions on August 24, 2009. The assessment 
represents that “detainee reporting” resulted in the “[r]evealing of the Karachi Plots,” stating: “When confronted 
with information provided by Ammar al-Baluchi, Khallad admitted during debriefings that al-Qa’ida was planning 
to attack the US Consulate in Karachi, Westerners at the Karachi Airport, and Western housing areas.” The footnote 



the admission ma de by Khallad bin 
) as its source. 



for this claim cites the May ^ 2003, disseminated intelligence report detailin 
Attash while being subjecte^otheCIA^senhanced intenogation techniques (| 

1386 1 4510 This cable also stated, “As noted in several previous cables, in 

■Consulate became aware of the threat to Consulate officials.” 



De cember 2002 

1387 HMHI 



14510 



1388 Italics added. See document entitled, “DC1A Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 
6, 2007, with the notation the document wa^senU^DCI^Nov^Hi^reparation for POTUS meeting.” 

TOP 

Page 245 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NQFORN 



Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash had been captured. When the CIA interrogators asked what 
Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash were “up to” in Karachi, KSM provided information 
regarding potential targets in Karachi. 1389 KSM’s belated reporting prompted the CIA’s ALEC 
Station to write a cable stating: 



“We were disappointed to see that KSM only made these new admissions of 
planned attacks in Pakistan after seeing the capture photographs of Ammar al- 
Baluchi and Khallad. We consider KSM’s long-standing omission of [this] 
information to be a serious concern, especially as this omission may well have 
cost American lives had Pakistani authorities not been diligent in following up 
on unrelated criminal leads that led to the capture of Ammar, bin Attash, and 
other probable operatives involved in the attack plans... Simply put, KSM has 
had every opportunity to come clean on this threat and, from our optic, he 
deliberately withheld the information until he was confronted with evidence 
that we already knew about it, or soon would know about it from Ammar and 
Khallad. . . KSM’s provision of the Pakistan threat reporting - only after he 
was made aware of the capture of the attack planners - is viewed as a clear 
illustration of continued and deliberate withholding of threat information 
which he believed had not yet been compromised.” 1390 



Ammar al-Baluchi, Khallad bin Attash, and KSM remained in CIA 
custody until their transfer to U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in September 
2006. 1391 All three remain in U.S. military custody. 



3. The Thwarting of the Second Wave Plot and the Discovery of the Al-Ghuraba Group 



Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and necessary to produce critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, 
which enabled the CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture terrorists, and save lives. Over a period 
of years, the CIA provided the “discovery” and/or “thwarting” of the Second Wave plotting and 
the “discovery” of the al-Ghuraba group as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. These representations were inaccurate. The Second Wave plotting was 
disrupted with the arrest and identification of key individuals. The arrests and identifications 



1389 



11448 (301 14 1Z APR 03); 



1 1454 (3017 1 0Z APR 03). As described in detail in the 

intelligence chronology in Volume II, KSM was rendered to CIA custody on March |, 2003, and was immediately 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. On March 5, 2003, he was “confronted” with the 
“perfume letter,” at which point he discussed the letter and its recipient, Hamza al-Zubayr. KSM had not yet been 
subjected to the waterboard. As described, Hamza al-Zubayr was killed in a September 2002 raid against al-Qa’ida- 
related safe houses. KSM stated that Khallad bin Attash had been responsible for obtaining operatives for the 
Hamza al-Zubayr operation. At the time KSM provided this information, a separate cable stated that KSM 
' continued to deny that h e has any [knowledge of] ongoing operations.” See [REDACTED] 34513 (052246Z MAR 



03); DIRECTOR 




(0623 12Z MA R 02) ; [REDACTED] 34575 (061929Z MAR 03); 

1345751 



SEP 06). 



34566 (061646Z MAR 03); 
34513 (052246Z MAR03). 
(02201 2Z MAY 03) 
3425 (050726Z SEP 06); 

TOP SECRET// 



1242 (050748Z SEP 06); 



Page 246 of 499 



2214 (050539Z 



/ /NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 




were unrelated to any reporting acquired during or after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against CIA detainees. Likewise, the al-Ghuraba group was identified 
by a detainee who was not in CIA custody. CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided significant fabricated information on both the Second Wave 
plotting and the al-Ghuraba group. 

further Details: Al-Qa’ida’s “Second Wave” plotting refers to 
two efforts by KSM to strike the West Coast of the United States with airplanes using non-Arab 
passport holders. While intelligence reporting often conflated the “Second Wave” plotting, KSM 
viewed the plotting as two separate efforts. 1392 Neither of the two efforts was assessed to be 
imminent, as KSM was still engaged in the process of identifying suicide operatives and 
obtaining pilot training for potential participants when each effort was disrupted through the 
arrest or identification of the suspected operatives and operational planners. 1393 

The al-Ghuraba student group was established in late 1999 by 
Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) leaders primarily to educate the sons of jailed JI leaders and to groom the 
students for potential leadership and operational roles in JI. Some members of the al-Ghuraba 
group reportedly completed militant training in Afghanistan and Pakistan while enrolled at 
Islamic universities in Karachi. 1394 Despite CIA representations to the contrary, intelligence and 



1392 See Second Wave / Al-Ghura ba Group intelligence chronology in Volume II, including, among other 

documents, DIRECTOR HH (2021 1Z JUN 03) and cable note on “Draft lntelM^S^Details his Thinking on 
and Efforts to Target California,” included as an attachment to an email from to a distribution list 

for CIA OTA in the Directorate of Intelligence, dated June 30, 2003, at 06:25 PM. 

1393 See intelligence chronology in Volume II for detailed information. See also statements by United States 
government officials, such as a February 9, 2006, White House briefing on “the West Coast Terrorist Plot by 
Frances Fragos Townsend, Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism.” At this briefing 
the White House emphasized how “collaboration with our international partners” had “disrupted terrorist networks 
around the world and serious al-Qaeda plots.” Using the “West Coast” plot as an example, Townsend stated that: 
“Khalid Shaykh Mohammed was the individual who led this effort. . . .The cell leader was arrested in February of 

2002, and as we begin — at that point, the other members of the cell believed that the West Coast plot had been 
cancelled [and] was not going forward... the lead guy is arrested, which disrupts it in February of ’02.” When asked 
about whether this plotting could be accurately described as a disruption given the belief by some that “it never got 
far enough to be disrupted,” Townsend stated, “there is no question in my mind that this is a disruption.” See also 
May 23, 2007, White House Press Release, entitled, “Fact Sheet: Keeping America Safe From Attack,” which states, 
“We Also Broke Up Other Post-9/11 Aviation Plots. In 2002, we broke up a plot by KSM to hijack an airplane and 
fly it into the tallest building on the West Coast.” As described in the Study, KSM was not detained until March 1 , 

2003. The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that “[t]he Study correctly points out that we erred when we 
represented that we ‘learned’ of the Second Wave plotting from KSM and ‘learned’ of the operational cell 
comprised of students from Hambali.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response describes the inaccurate representation as 
“imprecision” by the CIA, but nonetheless states that the CIA “continue(s) to assess this was a good example of die 
importance of intelligence derived from the detainee program”; and contends — for the first time — that Hambali’s 
capture “was a critical factor in the disruption of al-Qa’ida’s plan to conduct a ‘Second Wave’ attack.” As described 
throughout the Committee Study, in its efforts to obtain legal authorization and policy approval for the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, the CIA represented that the intelligence referenced was obtained “as a result” of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques (not the “detainee program”), and that the information obtained was 
unique and otherwise unavailable. As detailed in this summary and in Volume II, the capture of Hambali was 
unrelated to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

1394 Reporting indicates that the al-Ghuraba group was similar to the Pan Islamic Party of Malaysia (PAS)’s 
Masapakindo, aka Pakindo, organization. Masran bin Arshad was connected to Pakindo, and while in foreign 
government custody, explained that “in 1991, PAS [Pan Islamic Party of Malaysia] established a secret Malaysian 



Page 247 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 




open source reporting indicate the group was not “tasked with,” witting, or involved in any 
aspect of KSM’s Second Wave plotting. 1395 

The “discovery” and disruption of the “Second Wave Plot” (also 
known as the “West Coast Plot” and the “Tallest Building Plot”), 1396 along with the associated 
identification, discovery, and capture of the al-Ghuraba “cell,” is one of the eight most frequently 
cited examples provided by the CIA as evidence for the effectiveness of CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 1397 Over a period of years, CIA documents prepared for and provided 
to senior policymakers, intelligence officials, and the Department of Justice represent the 
thwarting and discovery of the “Second Wave” plotting and the identification, discovery, or 
arrest of the al-Ghuraba group members as an example of how “[k]ey intelligence collected from 
HVD interrogations after applying interrogation techniques” had “enabled CIA to disrupt 



Student Association known as ‘Masapakindo’ to help facilitate a steady pipeline of PAS religious and military 
trainees traveling from Malaysia to Pakistan, sometimes continuing on to Afghanistan, but ultimately returning to 
Malaysia. This student association for children of PAS members also was intended to serve as a general support 
structure for PAS students who were undergoing Islamic religious training in Pakistan and India. Masapakindo’s 
headquarters was based in Karachi, Pakistan.” See also February 27, 2004, Memorandum for CIA Inspector 
General from James L. Pavitt, CIA Deputy Director for Operations, entitled “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, 
Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program,” which contains a February 24, 2004, attachment entitled, 
“Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.” See also CIA Intelligence Product 
entitled, “Jemaah Islamiya: Counterterrorism Scrutiny Limiting Extremist Agenda in Pakistan,” dated April 18, 
2008. Although this report makes numerous references to the al-Ghuraba group, it does not reference the group’s 
potential engagement in KSM’s Second Wave attack. As described in this summary, and in greater detail in 
Volume II, contrary to CIA representations, a wide body of intelligence reporting indicates that the al-Ghuraba 
group was not “discovered” as a result of KSM’s reporting, nor was the al-Ghuraba group “tasked” with, or witting 
of, any aspect of KSM’s “Second Wave” plotting. See also KSM and Hambali reporting from October 2003, and 
the intelligence chronology in Volume II, to include [REDACTED] 45915 (141431Z SEP 03). 

1395 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees. The memorandum states: “Use of enhanced 
techniques, however, led to critical, actionable intelligence such as the discovery of the Guraba Cell, which was 
tasked with executing KSM’s planned Second Wave attacks against Los Angeles.” 

1396 References to the “Second Wave” attacks appeared in public news reports shortly after September 11, 2001, 
sometimes in reference to Zacarias Moussaoui. See, for example. The Washington Post, “Suspected Planner of 9/1 1 
Attacks Captured in Pakistan after Gunfight” (09/14/2002) (“Some investigators have theorized that Moussaoui, 
whose laptop computer contained information about crop dusting, may have been part of a second wave of terror 
attacks or a back-up plan instead.”); The New York Post, “2 nd Plot Tied to Moussaoui” (09/06/2002) (“French 
officials reportedly are claiming that Zacarias Moussaoui was never meant to be the ‘20 lh hijacker’ but was to be part 
of a ‘second wave’ of terror.”); The Los Angeles Times, “Officials Skeptical as Detainees Say Sept. 1 1 was First in a 
Trio” (10/01/2002) (“The Sept. 11 attacks may have been planned as the first of three terrorist strikes in the United 
States, each progressively bigger and more devastating than the last, U.S. officials said Monday, citing recent 
interviews with captured A1 Qaeda operatives. . . . Since days after Sept. 11, authorities have said they were 
concerned about a possible ‘second wave’ of attacks.”). Similarly, on May 6, 2006, an affidavit filed by Moussaoui 
stated, “I was part of another al-Qaeda plot which was to occur after September 11, 2001.” 

1397 A November 21, 2005, Newsweek article entitled, “The Debate Over Torture,” referenced a member of the 

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence stating that “enhanced interrogation techniques” worked with KSM to 
thwart an al-Qa’ida terrorist plot, which the magazine indicated was the “Second Wave” plot. The article included 
the following: “A career CIA official involved with interrogation policy cautioned Newsweek not to put too much 
credence in such claims. ‘Whatever briefing they got was probably not truthful,’ said the official, who did not wish 
to be identified discussing sensitive matters/] 




Page 248 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




terrorist plots” and “capture additional terrorists.” 1398 The CIA further represented that the 
intelligence acquired from the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “otherwise 
unavailable” and “saved lives.” 1399 



1398 Italics in original. March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from Legal Group, 

DCI Counterterrorist Center, document entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation 



Techniques.” 

13" p rom 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see\ 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of tire CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 

“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” {See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA-provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular - , its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” {See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[germination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” {See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” {See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” {See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 



Page 249 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



For example, in November 2007, the CIA prepared a briefing for 
President Bush. Under a section entitled, “Plots Discovered as a Result of EITs,” the CIA 
represented that the CIA “ learned ’ about the “Second Wave” plotting and the al-Ghuraba group 
only “after applying the waterboard along with other interrogation techniques.” 1400 



Likewise, on March 2, 2005, the CIA provided the Department of 
Justice Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) with a document entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” The CIA memorandum stated that the “Central 
Intelligence Agency can advise you that this program works and the techniques are effective in 
producing foreign intelligence.” 1401 The CIA stated that “enhanced interrogation techniques... 
[have] enabled CIA to disrupt plots” and “capture additional terrorists.” The document then 
listed 1 1 examples of “key intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after applying 
interrogation techniques,” 1402 including: 



“The ‘Second Wave’: This was a KSM plot to use East Asian operatives to 
crash a hijacked airliner into the tallest building on the US West Coast (Los 
Angeles) as a follow-on to 9/11. We learned this during the initial 
interrogation of KSM and later confirmed it through the interrogation of 
Hambali and Khallad. 



. . .The Guraba Cell: We learned of this 17 -member Jemaah lslamiyah cell 
from Hambali, who confirmed that some of the cell’s operatives were 
identified as candidates to train as pilots as part of KSM’s ‘second wave’ 
attack against the US. . ..” 1403 



Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted .”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, 
which provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1400 Italics added. “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, with the 
notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” CIA records indicate that 
Hambali was not subjected to the CIA’s waterboard techni que. 

1401 March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from] 

Counterterrorist Center, document entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 
Under a section entitled, “Results,” the CIA “Effectiveness Memo” states that the “CIA’s use of DOJ-approved 
enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of a comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled CIA to disrupt 
terrorist plots, capture additional terrorists, and collect a high volume of critical intelligence on al-Qa’ida. We 
believe that intelligence acquired from these interrogations has been a key reason why al-Qa’ida has failed to launch 
a spectacular attack in the West since 1 1 September 2001.” 

1402 Italics in original. 

1403 Italics added. March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from HH Legal Group, 

DCI Counterterrorist Center, document entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation 
Techniques.” The same representation ca n be found in multiple documents, incl uding “Briefing for Chief of Staff to 

ini' 'll! Ill' I ' I III! HIM I 

Page 250 of 499 



Legal Group, DCI 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET // 



//NOFOR N 



c ) The ensuing May 30, 2005, OLC memorandum, now declassified 



and publicly available, states: 



“[The CIA has] informed us that the interrogation of KSM — once [enhanced] 
interrogation techniques were employed — led to the discovery of a KSM plot, 
the ‘Second Wave’... and the discovery of the Ghuraba Cell, a 17-member 
Jemaah Islamiyah cell tasked with executing the ‘ Second Wave.’” UQ4 

The CIA provided similar inaccurate representations regarding the 
“discovery” and thwarting of the Second Wave plotting and/or the “discovery” of the al-Ghuraba 
Group in 18 of the 20 documents provided to senior policymakers and the Department of Justice 
between July 2003 and March 2009. 1405 

A review of CIA operational cables and other documents found 
that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques played no role in the “discovery” or thwarting 
of either “Second Wave” plot. Likewise, records indicate that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques played no role in the “discovery” of a 17-member “cell tasked with executing the 
‘Second Wave.’” 1406 

Intelligence Community records indicate that the initial “Second 
Wave” effort began in parallel with the planning for the September 11, 2001, attacks and 
included two operatives who were tasked with seeking pilot training. The thwarting of this 
plotting was unrelated to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The two 
operatives, Zacarias Moussaoui and Faruq al-Tunisi (aka Abderraouf Jdey), were known to be 
engaged in terrorist activity prior to any reporting from CIA detainees. 1407 On August 16, 2001, 



the President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Programs,” dated May 2, 2006; as well as 
“Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DC1 Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Interrogation (HVD1) 
Techniques,” dated March 2, 2005. 

1404 Italics added. Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, 
from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May be Used in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees. The memorandum states: “It is this 
paramount interest [the security of the nation] that the Government seeks to vindicate through the interrogation 
program. Indeed, the program, which the CIA believes ‘has been a key reason why al-Qa’ida has failed to launch a 
spectacular attack in the West since 11 September 2001 ,’ directly furthers that interest, producing substantial 
quantities of otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence. As detailed above, ordinary interrogation techniques had 
little effect on either KSM or Zubaydah. Use of enhanced techniques, however, led to critical, actionable 
intelligence such as the discovery of the Guraba Cell, which was tasked with executing KSM’s planned Second 
Wave attacks against Los Angeles.” 

1405 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 



Volume II. 

1406 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees. 



1407 See detailed reportin 
Study, including 



in the Second Wave / Al-Ghuraba Group intelligence chronology in Volume II of the 

and 1 

TaP^ECR FT//^^B^^^BB^^^M//NOFORN 

Page 251 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Zacarias Moussaoui, a French citizen, was arrested on immigration charges by the FBI in 
Minnesota. 1408 At the time of his arrest, the FBI informed the CIA that the FBI considered 
Moussaoui to be a “suspected airline suicide attacker.” 1409 On January 17, 2002, the FBI 
publicly released a statement identifying Faruq al-Tunisi, aka Abderraouf Jdey, a Canadian 
citizen, as an al-Qa’ida operative possibly “prepared to commit future suicide terrorist 
attacks.” 1410 Intelligence indicates that al-Tunisi, who remains at large, withdrew from 
participating in al-Qa’ida operations. 1411 His whereabouts remain unknown. 1412 



(T8//H^^|BPH//NE) The subsequent “Second Wave” effort began with KSM’s tasking 
of several Malaysian nationals — led by Masran bin Arshad — in late 2001 to attack the “tallest 
building in California” using shoe-bomb explosive devices to gain access to a plane’s cockpit. 1413 
The thwarting of this plotting was also unrelated to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. This plot was disrupted with the arrest of Masran bin Arshad in January 2002. This 
arrest was unrelated to CIA detainee reporting. 1414 Bin Arshad claimed the effort had “not 
advanced beyond the initial planning stages” when KSM “shelve[dj the plan” in December 2001 
when Richard Reid exposed the “shoe bomb” explosive method. 1415 Beginning in July 2002, 
while in the custody of a foreign government, and after the extensive use of rapport-building 
interrogation techniques, 1416 bin Arshad provided detailed information on this “Second Wave” 



1408 August 18, 2001, FBI Minneapolis Field Officer Memorandum referenced in Report of the Joint Inquiry into the 
Terrorist Attacks of September 1 1, 2001, by the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence. Zacarias Moussaoui was later convicted of terrorism-related offenses, and 
sentenced to life in prison. See Department of Justice, Office of the Inspector General, “A Review of the FBI’s 
Handling of Intelligence Information Related to the September 1 1 Attacks,” dated November 2004, and released 
publicly in June 2006, among other sources. See also other open source records, including November 20, 2007, 
Associated Press article entitled, “Judge in 9/11 Conspirator Moussaoui’s Case Questions Government Evidence in 
Terrorism Trials.” The article states: Judge “Brinkema said she no longer feels confident relying on those 
government briefs, particularly since prosecutors admitted last week that similar representations made in the 
Moussaoui case were false. In a letter made public Nov 13, [2007], prosecutors in the Moussaoui case admitted to 
Brinkema that the CIA had wrongly assured her that no videotapes or audiotapes existed of interrogations of certain- 
high profile terrorism detainees. In fact, two such videotapes and one audio tape existed.” 

1409 August 25, 2001, CIA Headquarters cable referenced by the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence 
and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence investigations, as well as the Twelfth Public Hearing on the 
“National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States,” June 16, 2004. 

1410 January 17, 2002, Federal Bureau of Investigation public release. 

1411 Zacarias Moussaoui was arrested on August 16, 2 001. Intellig ence indicates Faruq al-Tunisi withdrew from al- 
Qa’ida ope rations. Faruq al-Tunisi remains 

1412 AyEcJHBilli^is^ 

1413 Although the operation was disrupted with his arrest, bin Arshad claimed to officers of a foreign government 
that the operation was halted prior to his detention, specifically, when Ric hard Rei d’s shoe-bomb explosive 
concealment method was uncovered in December 2001 . See DIRECTOR H (270238Z FEB 03). 

1414 See intelligence chronology in Vo lume II. 

CIA ■■ ■■■; 65902 

DIRECTOR l 

1416 After bin Arshad was rendered from [Country 1] to [Country 2] for questioning, | 

[Country officials^cquired a “negligible amount of intelligence’’ from bin Arshad, and he was eventually 
■■1 to ■■ [Country 3]. The cable stated, [Countr^^authorities] indicate[d] that [Masran 

bin Arshad] was the toughest subject they had ever interrogated, including terrorists.” In anticipation of the 
release o^mAugust8 ; 2002, CIA intelligence report describing new information Masran bin Arshad was providing, 
the CIA in [Country 3] sen^^abl^^I^IeadquarterSjM^^ stated: “In light of the attention 

nil I 1 III I NOFORN 

Page 252 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - S E C RET// 



//NOF O R N 



plotting, the Malaysian operatives (details on Afflfi, Lillie, and “Tawfiq”), and the proposed 
method of attack. 1417 This information would later be corroborated by other intelligence 
collection, including, to a limited extent, reporting from CIA detainees in the spring of 2003. 14,8 
Another Malaysian national associated with Masran bin Arshad, Zaini Zakaria, was identified by 
a foreign government as a potential operative seeking pilot training as early as July 2002. 1419 
Zakaria was tasked with obtaining such training by al-Qa’ida, but failed to follow through with 
the tasking. 1420 Zakaria turned himself in to Malaysian authorities on December 18, 2002. 
Malaysian authorities released Zakaria in February 2009. 1421 In 2006, in a White House briefing 
on the “West Coast Terrorist Plot,” the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and 
Counterterrorism announced that the plot had been disrupted with the arrest of the cell leader, 
Masran bin Arshad. 1422 



that this report is likely to generateamongconsumers^ 
being used with Masran [by the Police I 



warrants reiterat ing that the interrogation methods 
|] are somewhat 



uncon ventional...This has entailed having several [Country 3 officers] spend an enormous amount of time with 
Masran praying with him, eating with him, earning his trust, listening to him, and eliciting fromhinrHiis^proach 



has yielded a significant amount of valuable intelligence.” (See 

65903 






65903 



) CIA suspicions that “Tawfiq” may be identifiable with Mohd Farik bin Amin, aka Zaid, aka 
(192004Z JUN 03). 

intelligence chronology in Volume II, including DIRECTOR IHH 



Zubair, are found in ALEC 

1418 See Second Wave/a l-Ghuraba Grou 
(082328Z JUL 03) and 

1419 See Second Wave/al-Ghuraba Group intelligence chronology in Volume II, including CIA 

JUL 02). 



1420 Among o ther rep orts, see DIRECTOR 
JUL 02), and 



■ (22I647Z 
CIA HH| (221647Z 



■ (082328Z JUL 03), | 

45325 (051614Z SEP 03). According to KSM, an individual named “Mussa,” which the CIA 
assessed was KSM’s name for Zaini Zakaria, disappeared after receiving money that was intended for pilot training. 
Reporting indicates that Zakaria — a Malaysian — was to be the pilot for the group of Malaysian individuals that 
Masran bin Arshad sought to use in the Second Wave plotting. As noted in the text, Zakaria turned himself into 
Malaysian authorities on December 1 8, 2002. Hambali — who was associated with these Malaysians — stated he “did 
not know why the operation was cancelled,” but surmised it might be because of the September 1 1 , 2001, attacks, or 
because Zaini Zakaria “got cold feet.” Hambali reported in September 2003 that the head of the operation was 
Masran bin Arshad and that Zaini Zakaria was the pilot selected to fly the airplane. Hambali corroborated Masran 
bin Arshad’s reporting that the other members of the group were Mohd Farik bin Amin (aka Zubair), Abd Al- 
Rahman bin Mustapha Afifi, and Bashir bin Lap Nazri (aka Lillie). By the time of Hambali 's capture, all three were 



in custod 

1421 



See DIRECTOR 




(181840Z MAY 07) and “Malaysia Frees 



9 (042340Z SEP 03)^ 

10044 (260718Z AUG 04). See also DIRECTOR | 

Suspected A1 Qaeda Pilot-Report,” Reuters, dated February 14, 2009. 

1422 As described, on February 9, 2006, in a White House briefing on “the West Coast Terrorist Plot by Frances 
Fragos Townsend, Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism,” the White House 
emphasized how “collaboration with our international partners” had “disrupted terrorist networks around the world 
and serious al-Qaeda plots.” Using the “West Coast” plot as an example, Townsend relayed that: “Klialid Shaykh 
Mohammed was the individual who led this effort. . . .The cell leader was arrested in February of 2002, and as we 
begin — at that point, the other members of the cell believed that the West Coast plot had been cancelled [and] was 
not going forward... the lead guy is arrested, which disrupts it in February of ’02.” When asked about whether this 
plotting could be credited as a disruption given the belief by some that “it never got far enough to be disrupted,” 
Townsend stated, “there is no question in my mind that this is a disruption.” See also May 23, 2007, White House 
Press Release, entitled, “Fact Sheet: Keeping America Safe From Attack,” which states “We Also Broke Up Other 
Post-9/1 1 Aviation Plots. In 2002, we broke up a plot by KSM to hijack an airplane and fly it into the tallest 
building on the West Coast.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that operatives involved in the “Second 
Wave” plot were arrested in 2002. The CIA’s June 2013 Response nonetheless contends that “Hambali remained 
capable of directing the plot at the time of his arrest,” and that, therefore, the arrest of Hambali “was a critical factor 
in the disruption of al-Qa’ida’s plan.” Ther^r^i^Cl^ecord^ndicatin^hat Hambali took any action in 

1 1 ii 1 1 ii 1 1 ' M( || ( nu'i 

Page 253 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Contrary to CIA representations, the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against KSM did not result in the “discovery” of KSM’s “Second 
Wave” plotting. On March 1, 2003, KSM was captured. He was rendered to CIA custody on 
March |, 2003, and was immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
While being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and in the weeks 
afterwards, KSM did not discuss the “Second Wave” plotting. 1423 On April 19, 2003 — 24 days 
after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques had ceased — interrogators 
questioned KSM about Masran bin Arshad and his role in developing a cell for the “Second 
Wave” attacks. After being told that Masran bin Arshad had been arrested, KSM told his 
interrogators, “I have forgotten about him, he is not in my mind at all.” KSM also denied that 
“he knew anything about a plot to take out the ‘tallest building’ in California.” 1424 KSM’s 
reporting prompted ALEC Station to write in a cable that “we remain concerned that KSM’s 
progression towards full debriefing status is not yet apparent where it counts most, in relation to 
threats to US interests, especially inside CONUS.” 1425 

According to a CIA cable, on May 5, 2003, KSM “eventually 
admitted to tasking Masran bin Arshad to target the tallest building in California.” 1426 KSM 
continued, however, to deny aspects of the plotting — such as denying the use of shoe-bombs in 
the operation, only to confirm the planned use of shoe-bombs in later interrogations. 1427 On June 
23, 2003, an ALEC Station officer wrote that “[gjiven that KSM only admitted knowledge of 
this operation upon learning of Masran’ s detention, we assess he is not telling all he knows, but 
rather is providing information he believes we already possess.” 1428 KSM was asked about 
detained Malaysian national Zaini Zakaria for the first time on July 3, 2003. During the 
interrogation, the CIA debriefer stated that there was information suggesting that Zakaria was 
funded by al-Qa’ida to take flight lessons in September 2001. 1429 KSM denied knowing the 
name Zaini Zakaria, but later described “Mussa.” The CIA suspected this was an alias for 
Zakaria. CIA officers at the detention site where KSM was being interrogated then wrote in a 
cable, “[t]he core problem, once again, is the appearance that KSM gave up this critical 
information only after being presented with the idea that we might already know something 
about it.” 1430 



furtherance of the plotting. Further, a November 2003 cable states that CIA interrogators believed Hambali’s role in 
al-Qa’ida terrorist activity was more limited than the CIA had assessed prior to his capture and that al-Qa’ida 
members did not consider Hambali^capable of leading an effort to plan, orchestrate and execute complicated 
operations on his own.” ( See HI^HI 1113(1 1 1252Z NOV 03).) The claim in the CIA’s June 201 3 Response 
that the capture of Hambali “resulted in large part from information obtained from” KSM is inaccurate. Details on 
the capture of Hambali are described elsewhere in this summary and in greater detail in Volume II. 



1423 See 

in Volume III 

1424 



10983(2423212 MAR 03); | 



10972 (241 122Z MAR 03); and the KSM detainee review 



1425 




11319 (191445Z APR 03), disseminated as 
"(222153Z APR 03) 

1 1 5 1 3 (05 1 1 20Z MAY 03 ) 

12068 (201407Z JUN 03); 12167 (301747Z JUN 03), dissemin ated as | 

^Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], H 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Highlight for Coord: KSM and Los Angeles Threat Reporting; 
dat e: June 23, 2003, at 02:21 PM. 

12208 (051545Z JUL 03), disseminated as 




1429 

1430 



12208 (051545Z JUL 03), di sseminated as 

T OP - SECRET// 

Page 254 of 499 




^ NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET -// 



//NOFORN 



With regard to the al-Ghuraba group, contrary to CIA 
representations, a wide body of intelligence reporting indicates that the al-Ghuraba group was 
not “discovered” as a result of reporting from KSM or Hambali, nor was the al-Ghuraba group 
“tasked” with, or witting of, any aspect of KSM’s “Second Wave” plotting. 1431 Rather, while in 
foreign government custody, Hambali’ s brother, Gun Gun Ruswan Gunawan, identified “a group 
of Malaysian and Indonesian students in Karachi” witting of Gunawan’s affiliation with Jemaah 
Islamiyah. 1432 CIA records indicate that Gunawan stated that the students were in Karachi “at 
the request of Hambali.” 1433 In a cable conveying this information, CIA officers recalled 
intelligence reporting indicating KSM planned to use Malaysians in the “next wave of attacks,” 
and stated Gunawan had just identified “a group of 16 individuals, most all of whom are 
Malaysians.” 1434 The cable closed by stating, “we need to question Hambali if this collection is 
part of his ‘next wave’ cell.” 1435 (From July through December 2002, foreign government 
reporting described KSM’s use of Malaysians in the “next wave attacks.” The reporting 



Legal Group, DCI 



1431 March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from | 

Counterterrorist Center, document entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 
The same representation can be found in multiple documents, including “Briefing for Chief of Staff to the President 
Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention, and Interrogation Programs” dated May 2, 2006, as well as “Talking Points 
for 10 March 2005 DCI Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques,” dated 
March 2, 2005. As noted earlier, the CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that the CIA’s representations on 
how the CIA first learned of the group were inaccurate. See intelligence chronology in Volume II for detailed 
information on this matter. 

1432 



15359 As detailed in Volume II, while still in foreign government custody, 

Hambali stated he had a brother named “Ruswan Gunawan” who attended Abu Bakr University in Karachi and lived 
in a dormitory on or near the campus. According to Hambali, his brother served as his “primary conduit for 
communications” with KSM and al-Qa’ida. The information that Hambali provided regarding the true name of his 
brother was relayed to CIA Headquarters and to CIA personnel in Pakistan and elsewhere on August 15, 2003. The 
cable stated that, while Hambali was in foreign government custody, the CIA “learned that” Hambali had a 25-year- 
old-brother at Abu Bakr Uni versity in Kara chi named “Rusman Gunawan.” According to Hambali, the brodierlived 
in a dormitory near campus^^^^H^^^responded that this was “actionable intelligence that may help” ■■■ 
locate Gunawan and that would check records of the students at Abu Bakr University for 

matches to Gunawan. Previous checks for names provided by KSM and other CIA detainees for Hambali’s brother 
(“Abdul Hadi”) did not result in matches or locational information. The Director of the CIA Counterterrorism 
Center subsequently authorized the capture and detention of Hambali’s brot her base d on the information Hambali 
had provided in foreign government custody. Thereafter, CIA personnel in began working to facilitate the 

capture of Gunawan by Pakistani authorities . Days later, a CIA cable referenced information on the p robable 
location of Ruswan Gunawan and described 

See intelligence 

chronology in Volu me II for deta ils, including 87551 (15073 1Z AUG 03); | 

(150738Z AUG 03); ■■■■15108 (161 148Z AUG 03); ALEC*H (18171 1Z AUG 03); | 

(25 1117Z AUG 03); AU3C^Bfcqil729Z SEP 03); and ■■■1524 3 (020259Z SEP 03). 

The cable closes by stating that Gunawan suggested the interrogators ask 
Hambali about the 17-member group, “now that we can confront him with [Gunawan] having unmasked the group.” 
The cable added that the Pakistani government would not allow the members of the student group to depart Pakistan 
and that “confro nting Hambali with [the i nformation on the 17-member group] should also be interesting.” 

1434 15359 ■^■■■IIB. Records indicate that it was this initial analysis that led the CIA to 

consider the group part of KSM’s “Second Wave” “cell.” It is unknown if these CIA officers were aware of Masran 
bin Arshad’s reporting on his team of Malaysian nationals initially tasked with conducting an attack against the 
“tallest building in California” using shoe-bomb explosive devices to gain access to a plane’s cockpit. See 



87552 



15173 




DIRECTOR 

1435 



T OP SECRET/, 



7NOFORN 



Page 255 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NQFQRN 



included Masran bin Arshad’s information, provided while he was in foreign government 
custody, on his four-person Malaysian cell tasked by KSM 1436 to be part of an operation targeting 
the West Coast of the United States, as well as July 2002 reporting on Malaysian national Zaini 
Zakaria seeking pilot training. 1437 ) 

Contrary to CIA representations, the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Hambali did not result in the “discovery” of “the Guraba Cell” 
that was “tasked with executing the ‘Second Wave’” plotting. As noted, in foreign government 
custody, Hambali’s brother. Gun Gun Ruswan Gunawan, identified “a group of Malaysian and 
Indonesian students in Karachi” witting of Gunawan ’s affiliation with Jemaah Islamiyah. 1438 
The cable conveying this information recommended “confronting Hambali” with this 
information. 1439 While being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, Hambali 
was questioned about the al-Ghuraba group and KSM’s effort to use airplanes to attack the 
United States. Hambali told his CIA interrogators “that some of the members of [the al-Ghuraba 
group] were destined to work for al-Qa’ida if everything had gone according to plan,” that one 
member of the group had “ambitions to become a pilot,” that he (Hambali) was going to send 
three individuals to KSM in response to KSM’s “tasking to find pilot candidates, but never got 
around to asking these people,” and that “KSM told him to provide as many pilots as he 
could.” 1440 Months later, on November 30, 2003, after three weeks of being questioned by a 



1436 In October 2003, KSM informed the CIA that “he did not yet view the [al-Ghurabaj group as an operational pool 
from which to draft operatives,” and noted even those who had received military training were not ready to be 



considered for “ongoing planning.” See \ 



1437 



|10223 (221317Z OCT 03) and 



65903 



See intelligence chronology in Volume 11, including CIA 



and 



65902 




The four members of the Malaysian 




cell were not members of the al-Ghuraba group. 

1 5359 

15359 As described, the cable closes by stating that Gunawan suggested the 

interrogators ask Hambali about the 17-member group, “now that we can confront him with [Gunawan] having 
unmasked the group.” The cable added that the Pakistani government would not allow the members of the student 
group to depart Pakistan and that “confronting Hambali with [the information on the 17-member group] should also 
be interesting.” 

1440 See [REDACTED] 45953 (151241Z SEP 03) and [REDACTED] 1323 (161749Z SEP 03). CIA cables describe 
how Hambali was repeatedly questioned on this issue while being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. A CIA cable states: “With the gradual ramp-up of intensity of the session and the use of the enhanced 
measures, [Hambali] finally stepped over the line and provided the information.” Months later Hambali admitted to 
fabricating the information provided. A cable explained that Hambali “gave answers that were similar to what was 
being asked and what he inferred the interrogator or debriefer wanted, and when the pressure subsided or he was 
told that the information he gave was okayUHambalil knew that he had provided the answer that was being sought.” 
( See ■■ 1 142 (November 30, 2003), 1144 (010823Z DEC 03).) The CIA represented in the 

February 2004 Pavitt memo to the CIA Inspector General, among other documents, that “as a result of the lawful use 
of EITs, Hambali provided information [on the al-Ghuraba group]. . . some of whom had been designated as the 
pilots” for the Second Wave attacks. The CIA’s June 2013 Response indicates that the CIA continues to assess that 
multiple al-Ghuraba members had an “interest in aircraft and aviation.” CIA records do not support this assertion. 



While one member of the al-Ghuraba group was interested in airplanes, | 



Ghuraba group member. Person 1], intelligence indicates that the interest was unrelated to terrorist activity 



[a specific al- 



intelligence chronology in Volume II, including | 



15608 (| 



), describing 



heart chats, 



[Person! ’s] interview while in foreign government custody.) A CIA cable states “after several heart-to- 



[Person 1] cried and pledged his full cooperation.” Under questioning, 



[Person 1] 



stated that Gunawan encouraged 
and early 2002 to recruit him for pilot trainin 

TOP SECRET/; 



[Person 1] to pursue his interest in aircraft and “attempted in late 2001 




[Person 1] deflected these requests from 

/N OFORN 



Page 256 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



debriefer “almost entirely in Bahasa Indonesia,” Hambali admitted to fabricating a number of 
statements during the period he was being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, including information on efforts to locate pilots for KSM. Specifically, Hambali 
stated “he lied about the pilot because he was constantly asked about it and under stress, and so 
decided to fabricate.” According to a cable, Hambali said he fabricated these claims “in an 
attempt to reduce the pressure on himself,” and “to give an account that was consistent with what 
[Hambali] assessed the questioners wanted to hear.” 1441 The November 30, 2003, cable noted 
that CIA personnel “assesse[d] [Hambali] ’s admission of previous fabrication to be credible.” 1442 
Hambali then consistently described “the al-Ghuraba organization” as a “development camp for 
potential future JI operatives and leadership, vice a JI cell or an orchestrated attempt by II to 



Gunawan. Asked about his interest in aviation, 



[Person 1] stated that “he was the only member of the 



Ghuraba study group with an interest in aviation,” and that “since he was about four years old he has ‘been a big 



maniac for airplanes.’ 



[Person 1] told his interrogators that he purchased and read multiple magazines 



about aircraft from various book stores. A CIA officer wrote, “asked to pro vide detai ls on the Boeing 747, [Person 

[Person l’s] claims were 



1] rattled off an impressive array of facts about the various series of 747s.” 
consistent with other intelligence in CIA databases. See intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional 
information. 

J142 (3011 01 Z NOV 03). This cable appears to have been retransmitted the following day as 
1144 (010823Z DEC 03). 

1442 The CIA detention site wrote, “[Hambali] ’s admission came after three weeks of daily debriefing sessions with 
| the case officer] carried out almost entirely in Bahasa Indonesia. [Hambali] has consistently wanned to [the case 
officer’s] discussions with him, and has provided to [the case officer] additional information that he had avoided in 
the past... More tellingly, [Hambali] has opened up considerably to [the case officer] about his fears and 
motivations, and has taken to trusting [the case officer] at his word. [Hambali] looks to [the case officer] as his sole 
confidant and the one person who has [Hambali]’s interest in mind.... Given this, Base notes [Hambali]’s account 
of how, through statements read to him and constant repetition of questions, he was made aware of what type of 
answers his questioners wanted. [Hambali] said he merely gave answers that were similar to what was being asked 
and what he inferred the interrogator or debriefer wanted, and when the pressure subsided or he was told that the 
information he gave was okay, [Hambali] knew that he h ad provided the answer that was being sought.” ( See 
intelligence chronology in Volume II, including HU 1 142 (November 30, 2003).) The CIA’s June 2013 
Response states that “[w]e continue to assess [Hambali’s] original revelation was correct, however, based on KSM’s 
claim that he tasked Hambali to identify and train pilots, Hambali’s verification of this claim in multiple instances, 
and the students’ interest in aircraft and aviation.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response is incongruent with the 
assessment of CIA interrogators at the time — that the claim of fabrication was “credible” — as well as with a wide 
body of subsequent reporting. CIA records indicate that CIA officers confused intelligence reporting on the 
Malaysians involved in the “Second Wave” plotting — an apparent reference to Masran bin Arshad, Zaini Zakaria, 
and three other Malaysians — with the al-G huraba Malaysian student group 

1 1 ii 1 1 ii 1 1 n < HM'i 

Page 257 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



initiate JI operations outside of Southeast Asia.” 1443 This description was corroborative of other 
intelligence reporting. 1444 



An October 27, 2006, CIA cable states that “all of the members of 
the JI al-Ghuraba cell have been released,” 1445 while an April 18, 2008, CIA intelligence report 
focusing on the Jemaah Islamiyah and referencing the al-Ghuraba group makes no reference to 
the group serving as potential operatives for KSM’s “Second Wave” plotting. 1446 



4. The Thwarting of the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot and the Capture ofDhiren 
Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi 



Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and necessary to produce critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, 
which enabled the CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture terrorists, and save lives. Over a period 
of years, the CIA provided the capture of Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi, and the thwarting of 
Barot’s United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. These representations were inaccurate. The operation that 
resulted in the identification of a U.K. -based “Issa,” the identification of “Issa” as Dhiren Barot, 
Dhiren Barot’s arrest, and the thwarting of his plotting, resulted from the investigative activities 
of U.K. government authorities. Contrary to CIA representations, KSM did not provide the first 
reporting on a U.K. -based “Issa,” nor are there records to support the CIA representation that 
reporting from CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques resulted 
in Dhiren Barot’s arrest. After the arrest of Dhiren Barot, CIA officers prepared a document for 
U.K. authorities which stated: “while KSM tasked al-Hindi to go to the US to surveil targets, he 
was not aware of the extent to which Barot’s planning had progressed, who Issa’s co- 
conspirators were, or that Issa’s planning had come to focus on the UK.” The plotting associated 



1443 Hambali elaborated that the al-Ghuraba group was similar to the Pan Islamic Party of Malaysia (PAS)’s 

Masapakindo, aka Pakindo, organization. Masran bin Arshad was connected to Pakindo, and, while in foreign 
government custody, explained that “in 1991, PAS [Pan Islamic Party of Malaysia] established a secret Malaysian 
Student Association known as ‘Masapakindo’ to help facilitate a steady pipeline of PAS religious and military 
trainees traveling from Malaysia to Pakistan, sometimes continuing on to Afghanistan, but ultimately returning to 
Malaysia. This student association for children of PAS members also was intended to serve as a general support 
structure for PAS students who were undergoing Islamic religious training in Pakistan and India. Masapakindo’ s 
headquarters was based in Karachi, Pakistan.” See intelligen ce chron ology in Volume II for additional information, 
including [REDACTED] 45915 (141431Z SEP 03) and CIA (16062IZ DEC 02). See also February 27, 

2004, Memorandum for CIA Inspector General from James L. Pavitt, CIA Deputy Director for Operations, entitled 
“Comments to Draft IG Special Review,” “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program,” which contains 
a February 24, 2004, attachment entitled, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Activities.” See also CIA Intelligence Product entitled, “Jemaah Islamiya: Counterterrorism Scrutiny Limiting 
Extremist Agenda in Pakistan,” dated April 18, 2008. See also KSM and Hambali reporting from October 2003. 

1444 See intelligence chronology in Volume II. Although NSA signals intelligence was not provided for this Study, 
an April 2008 CIA intelligence report on the Jemaah Islamiya noted that the al-Ghuraba group “consisted of the sons 
of JI leaders, many of whom completed basic militant training in Afghanistan and Pakistan while enrolled at Islamic 
universities in Karachi,” and that this assessment was based on “signals intelligence and other reporting.” See CIA 
Intelligence Product entitled, “Jemaah Islamiya: Counterterrorism Scrutiny Limiting Extremist Agenda in Pakistan,” 
dated April 18, 2008. 

1445 WASHINGTON DC ■ 



| (2721 13Z OCT 06) 

1446 CIA Intelligence Product entitled, “Jemaah Islamiya: Counterterrorism Scrutiny Limiting Extremist Agenda in 
Pakistan,” dated April 18, 2008. 

— — /NOH)UN 

Page 258 of 499 



TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET/ / 



//NOFORN 



with Dhiren Barot was assessed by experts to be “amateurish,” “defective,” and unlikely to 
succeed. 



Further Details: Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi, 1447 met with al- 
Qa’ida leaders in Pakistan in early 2004 to discuss potential terrorist attacks against targets in the 
United Kingdom. 1448 Intelligence reporting indicates that Barot spent February and March 2004 



1447 Dhiren Barot was referred to as “lssa,” “Abu Issa,” “Abu Issa al-Pakistani,” and “lssa al-Britani.” CIA records 
indicate that Dhiren Barot’ s most common alias, “Issa al-Hindi” (variant “Esa al-Hindi”) - the name used to author 
the book, ‘The Army of Madinah in Kashmir” - was uncovered in May 2003 from FBI interviews of an individual 
in FBI custody, James Ujaama, aka Bilal Ahmed. Intelligence reporting indicated that Dhiren Barot’ s, aka Esa al- 
Hindi’s, “The Army of Madinah in Kashmir” was a well-known book among the U.K. extremist community. 
Information on the book was prominently available online in 2002, on, among other internet sites, the website of the 
book store associated with Moazzem Begg, a U.K. extremist who was arrested and transferred to U.S. military 
custody at Guantanam o Bay, Cuba, in 2002. The cover of the book lists “Esa Al-Hindi” as the author (£| 
BBHjH|280438Z (280746Z MAY 03)). 

1448 Note on CIA records related to U.K.-based “Issas”: Two United Kingdom-based al-Qa’ida associates, Dhiren 

Barot and Sajid Badat, were known by the same common aliases, lssa, Abu Issa, Abu lssa al-Britani (“[ofj Britain”) 
and/or Issa al-Pakistani. Both individuals were British Indians who had been independently in contact with senior 
al-Qa’ida leaders in Pakistan. Reporting indicated that the Issa(s) were located in the U.K. and engaged in terrorist 
targeting of the U.K. The investigation into their true identities was a U.K.-led operation. As a result, the CIA 
sometimes had limited insight into U.K.-based activities to identify and locate the Issas. Senior CIA personnel 
expressed frustration that the U.K. was not sharing all known information on its investigations, writing in August 
2003 that “[the FBI is] clearly working closely with the [U.K. service] on these matters and [the CIA is] at the 
mercy” of what it is told. Until the arrest of one of the Issas, Sajid Badat, on November 27, 2003, the U.S. 
Intelligence Community and U.K. authorities often confused the two al-Qa’ida associates. As a result, the quality 
and clarity of detainee reporting on the Issas (including reporting from detainee^iUh^ustod^Dhe CIA, U.S. 
military, Department of Justice, and foreign services) varied. CIA personnel reported in 

September 2003 that there were “two (or three) Abu Issas” in intelligence reporting and that, because of their 
similarities, it was often “unclear which Issa the detainees [were] referring to at different stages.” Once detained in 
the United Kingdom in November 2003, Sajid Badat (one of the Issas) cooperated with U.K. authorities and 
provided information about the other “Issa.” Badat stated that “people often asked [Badat] about [the other] Issa, as 
they were both British Indians.” According to Sajid Badat, “anyone who had been involved with jihad in Britain 
since the mid-90s” would know lssa al-Hindi (aka Dhiren Barot), to include Babar Ahmed, Moazzem Begg, Richard 
Reid, Zacarias Moussaoui, and KSM. Dhiren Barot (the other Issa), arrested on August 3, 2004, was found to have 
been especially well-known among the U.K. extremist community, having written a popular book in 1999 
expounding the virtues of jihad in Kashmir under the alias, “Esa al-Hindi.” CIA records include a reference to the 
book and a description of its author (“a brother from England who was a Hindu and became a Muslim. . .[who] got 
training in Afghanist an ...”) as ea rly as December 1999. ( See information disseminated by the CIA on 12/31/99 in 

|.) [A foreign partner] would later report that Dhiren Barot “frequently” appeared “in 

reporting of terrorist training” and “involvement in Jihad in occupied Kashmir, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Malaysia, 
throughout the 1990s.” As described, the Committee Study is based on more than six million pages of material 
related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program provided by the CIA. Access was not provided to 
intelligence databases of the CIA, or any other U.S. or foreign intelligence or law enforcement agency. Insomuch as 
intelligence from these sources is included, it was, unless noted otherwise, found within the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program material produced for this Study. It is likely that significant intelligence unrelated to the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program on Sajid Badat and Dhiren Barot exists in U.S. intelligenceand law 
enforcem ent records and databases. ( See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including: ALEC^^^^I (1 12157Z 
JUN 03); ■■■ 19907 (231744 Z APR 0 4); 99093 (020931Z SEP 03); ALEC 

AU G 03); CIA WASHI NGTON DC ■■ (162127Z JUN 03); and a series of emails between] 
and (with multiple ccs) on August 22, 2003, at 9:24:43 AM.) In the context of the 

Capture/Identification of Sajid Badat, the CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “KSM’s reporting also clearly 
distinguished between, and thereby focused investigations of, two al-Qa’ida operatives known as Issa al-Britani.” 

As detailed in the KSM detainee review in Volume 111, KSM did discuss the two operatives, but he did not identify 

mi 1 1 ii 1 1 i ii ii i mi 

Page 259 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



flNOFORN 



in Pakistan with senior al-Qa’ida explosives expert ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Muhajir, likely refining 
plans to use vehicle-based bombs against U.K. targets. 1449 In July 2004, casing reports 
associated with “Issa” were recovered in a raid in Pakistan associated with the capture of Abu 
Talha al-Pakistani. 1450 During questioning in foreign government custody, “Abu Talha stated the 
U.S. casing reports were from Abu Issa.” 1451 Further debriefings of Abu Talha revealed that 
Issa, aka Dhiren Barot, was the “operational manager” for al-Qa’ida in the United Kingdom. 1452 
Additional information about Dhiren Barot’ s U.K. plotting was recovered from the hard drives 
confiscated during the raid that resulted in the arrest of Dhiren Barot. A document describing the 
plotting was divided into two parts. The first part included “the Gas Limos project,” which 
envisioned parking explosives-laden courier vans or limousines in underground garages. The 
second part, the “radiation (dirty bomb) project,” proposed using 10,000 smoke detectors as part 
of an explosive device to spread a radioactive element contained in the detectors. Dhiren Barot’ s 
plotting was referred to as the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot. 1453 The U.K. Urban Targets 



either by name (or, in the case of Dhiren Barot, by his more common kunya, Issa al-Hindi) and provided no 
actionable intelligence that contributed to the eventual identification and location of either “Issa.” 

1449 See email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED] at the Office of Director of National Intelligence; subject: 
“URGENT: Unclassified Fact Sheet for [REDACTED]”; date: October 6, 2005, at 2:39 PM. 



3924 



The CIA has 



CIA WASHINGTON DC | 

represented that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques resulted in the identification and arrest of 
“Abu Talha al-Pakistani.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that Abu Talha’s arrest and debriefing was 
“invaluable to our overall understanding of Issa’s activities and the threat he posed,” and claims that Abu Talha’s 
arrest “would not have happened if not for reporting from CIA-held detainees.” CIA records do not support this 
statement. CIA records indicate that Abu Talha was identified and located independent of information from CIA 
detainees. Abu Talh a al-Pak istani, a Pakistani with links to U.K. extremists, was identified through information 

[intelligence collection] and the U.K. investigation of U.K.-based extremist Baber 



derived from British 

Ahmed and his associates. These individuals were already under investigation by the [foreign partner]. 

Further, Baber Ahmed was known to the U.S. intelligence and law enforcement authorities prior to any CIA 
detainee reporting. Foreign government authorities, relying on information provided by the United Kingdom and, to 
an extent, U.S. signals intelligence, ultimately located and arrested Abu Talha al-Pakistani. Because of the central 
role of U.K. authorities, CIA records do not include a comprehensive accounting of the investigation and operations 
that led to Abu Talha al-Pakistani ’s detention. CIA records indicate, however, that Abu Talha al-Pakistani was 
identified by two detainees in foreign government custody, shortly after their capture. (Both detainees would later 
be transferred to CIA custody and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques.) The first of these two 
detainees was Majid Khan, who on March 6, 2003, discussed Ammar al-Baluchi’s Karachi-based assistant, “Talha.” 
Majid Khan provided a phone number for Talha, and used that number at the request of his captors in an effort to 
locate and capture Ammar al-Baluchi through Talha. This reporting, which Majid Khan provided while he was in 
foreign government custody, preceded any reporting from CIA detainees. The other detainee who reported on Abu 
Talha was Ammar al-Baluchi, who described him as “Suliman” and stated that he had been dispatched to the United 
Kingdom to recruit operatives suitable for hijacking and suicide operations. Ammar al-Baluchi was also in foreign 
government custody at the time of this disclosure. KSM’s failure to mention Abu Talha/“Su liman,” more than a 
month after the CIA had ceased using its enhanced interrogation techniques against him, prompted one of KSM’s 
debriefers to state that “KSM could be in trouble very soon.” KSM also fabricated that he had shown a sketch 
related to the Heathrow Airport plot to Ammar al-Baluchi, rather than to Abu Talha, until confronted with Ammar 
al-Baluchi’s denials, more than three months after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against 
KSM had cease d. See Volume II and the KSM detainee review in Volume El for additional information. 

1451 Email from: |^^H|||; to: James Pavitt and others; subject: “Laptop docex from recent raid may yield 

pre-electionthre^informat^^ 2004, at 7:35 AM. 

1452 HHI 3924^^H^^^J^H£disseminated as 

1453 See DIRECTOR H|F(032140Z AUG 04). See also intelligence chronology in Volume II, as well as email 
from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], at the Office of Director of National Intelligence; subject: “URGENT: 
Unclassified Fact Sheet for [REDACTED]”; date: October 6, 2005, at 02:39 PM. The email includes a CIA- 

I I II II III I 

Page 260 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET - // 



//NOFORN 



Plot was disrupted when Dhiren Barot and his U.K.-based associates were detained in the United 
Kingdom in early August 2004. 1454 On August 24, 2004, U.K. authorities informed the CIA that 
the criminal charges against Barot and his co-conspirators “were mainly possible owing to the 
recovery of terrorist-related materials during searches of associated properties and vehicles 
following their arrests.’’ 1455 In September 2004, an Intelligence Community assessment stated 
that Dhiren Barot was “in an early phase of operational planning at the time of his capture,” and 
that there was no evidence to indicate that Barot had acquired the envisioned materials for the 
attacks. 1456 In December 2005, an FBI assessment stated, “the main plot presented in the Gas 
Limos Project is unlikely to be as successful as described,” concluding, “we assess that the Gas 
Limos Project, while ambitious and creative, is far-fetched.” 1457 On November 7, 2006, Dhiren 
Barot was sentenced to life in prison. On May 16, 2007, Barot’s sentence was reduced from life 
in prison to 30 years after a British Court of Appeal found that expert assessments describing the 
plot as “amateurish,” “defective,” and unlikely to succeed were not provided to the sentencing 
judge. 1458 

The thwarting of the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot and the 
identification and/or capture of Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi, is one of the eight most 
frequently cited examples provided by the CIA as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. Over a period of years, CIA documents prepared for and 
provided to senior policymakers, intelligence officials, and the Department of Justice represent 
the identification and/or arrest of Dhiren Barot, and/or the disruption of his U.K. plotting, as an 
example of how “[k]ey intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after applying 
interrogation techniques” had “enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots” and “capture additional 
terrorists.” 1459 In at least one document prepared for the president, the CIA specifically 



coordinated fact sheet and states the following regarding Dhiren Barot and his U.K. attack planning: “Issa al- 
Hindi — who previously traveled to and cased a number of financial targets in the US — met with al-Qa’ida leaders in 
Pakistan in early 2004 to discuss attack planning against targets in the UK. Issa spent February and March 2004 in 
Shkai, Pakistan, with senior al-Qa’ida explosives expert ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Muhajir, probably refining plans to use 
vehicle bombs against UK targets. Issa’s reports, which were recovered in a raid in mid-2004, discussed ramming a 
fuel tanker into a target and parking explosives -laden courier vans or limousines in underground garages. 

Disruption: Issa and members of his cell were detain ed in the UK in early August 2004 — soon after the arrest of key 
Hamza Rabi’a subordinate Abu Talha al-Pakistani in H||[ Pakistan.” 

1454 CIA internal assessments concur with this analysis. See “disruption” text in an email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
[REDACTED], at the Office of Director of National Intelligence; subject: “URGENT: Unclassified Fact Sheet for 
[REDA CTED]” ; date: October 6, 2005, at 02:39 PM. 

1455 CIA ■■ (242144Z AUG 04) 

1456 Disseminated intelligence product by the IICT, entitled, “Homeland: Reappraising al-Qa’ida’s “Election 
Threat,” dated September 10, 2004. 

1457 FBI Intelligence Assessment, “The Gas Limos Project: An al-Qa’ida Urban Attack Plan Assessment,” dated 
December 14, 2004. 

1458 See Royal Courts of Justice Appeal, Barot v R [2007], EWCA Crim 1 1 19 (16 May 2007). The expert 
assessments determined that the plotting involved “a professional-looking attempt from amateurs who did not really 
know what they were doing.” See also June 15, 2007, Bloomberg news article entitled, “Terrorist Gang Jailed for 
Helping London and New York Bomb Plot.” 

1459 Italics included in CIA Memorandum to the Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” from March 2, 2005. See also CIA talking points for National Security 
Council entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DCI Meeting PC: Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee 
Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques,” dated March 4, 2005, as well as multiple other CIA briefing records and 
memoranda. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 261 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




highlighted the waterboard technique in enabling the “disruption of [Dhiren Barot’s] sleeper 
cell.” 1460 The CIA further represented that the intelligence acquired from the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques was “otherwise unavailable” and “saved lives. ” J461 

1460 See document entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, with 
the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 

1461 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see: 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 
“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[t]ermination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” (See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without die use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” ( See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” (See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 




Page 262 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




F° r example, documents prepared in February 2009 for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta on the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques state 
that the “CIA assesses... the techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and 
that “most, if not all, of the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would 
not have been discovered or reported by other means.” The document provides examples of 
“some of the key captures, disrupted plots, and intelligence” attributed to CIA interrogations. 

The document includes the following: 

“Key Captures from HVD Interrogations: . . . arrest ofDhiren Barot (aka lssa 
al-Hindi) in the United Kingdom” 1462 

The materials for Director Panetta also include a chart entitled, “Key Intelligence and Reporting 
Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid Shaykh Muhammad,” that identifies two pieces of “key 
intelligence” acquired from KSM, one related to Majid Khan 1463 and the other to Dhiren Barot: 

“KSM reports on an unidentified UK-based operative, lssa al-Hindi, which 
touches off an intensive CIA, FBI and [United Kingdom] manhunt.” 1464 

Likewise, a December 2004 CIA memorandum prepared for 
National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice responded to a request “for an independent study of 
the foreign intelligence efficacy of using enhanced interrogation techniques.” The CIA 
responded, “[t]here is no way to conduct such a study,” but stated that the “CIA’s use of DOJ- 

Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),’’ 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases (DTS #2009-1258), 
which provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1462 Italics added. CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DC1A Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM).” The documents include “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document 
“EITs and Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and 
KSM),” “Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include 
“Background on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.” 

1463 The reference in the document to KSM’s reporting related to Majid Khan is inaccurate. The document asserts: 
“When confronted with KSM’s information, Majid admits he delivered the money to Zubair. ...” As described in 
this summary, and more extensively in Volume II, Majid Khan provided information on the referenced money 
transfer while in foreign government custody, to an interrogator using rapport-building techniques, prior to any 
information from KSM. 

1464 CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 18FEB.2009” and 

graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid Shaykh Muhammad 
(KSM).” Includes “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and Effectiveness,” with 
associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” “Background on Key 
Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background on Key Captures and 
Plots Disrupted.” 




Page 263 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NQFORN 



approved enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of a comprehensive interrogation approach, 
has enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture additional terrorists, and collect a high volume 
of critical intelligence on al-Qa’ida.” The document then provides examples of “[kjey 
intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation techniques,” 1465 
including: 

“Issa al-Hindi: KSM first 1466 identified Issa al-Hindi as an operative he sent to 
the US prior to 9/1 1 to case potential target^r^JY^an^Washington. When 
shown surveillance photos provided by [foreign partner 

authorities], HVDs confirmed al-Hindi’s identity. Al-Hindi’s capture by the 
British resulted in the disruption of a sleeper cell and led to the arrest of other 
operatives.” 1467 



Similarly, CIA Director Michael Hayden represented to the 
Committee on April 12, 2007, that “KSM also provided the first lead to an operative known as 
‘Issa al-Hindi,’ with other detainees giving additional identifying information.” 1468 

The CIA provided similar inaccurate representations regarding the 
thwarting of the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot and the identification and/or arrest of 
Dhiren Barot, aka Abu Issa al-Hindi, in 17 of the 20 documents provided to policymakers and 
the Department of Justice between July 2003 and March 2009. 1469 

(TS/dmfll^/NF) A review of CIA operational cables and other documents found 
that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques did not result in the unique intelligence that the 



1465 Italics in original. 

1466 'j’hg ciA’ s June 2013 Response states that the “CIA accurately represented that Khalid Shaykh Muhammad 
(KSM) provided the initial lead to a UK-based al-Qa’ida operative named Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi, whom 
KSM had tasked to case US targets. That information [from KSM] allowed us to identify this Issa as Barot and 
ultimately led British authorities to arrest him.” As is described in this summary, and in greater detail in Volume II, 
this CIA representation is not supported by internal CIA records. 

1467 CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Intelligence, ” Subject: 

“Effectively^ InterrogationTech^ues,” included in email from: to: 

and subject: on value 

techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. The email references the attached “information paper to Dr. 
Rice explaining the value of the interrogation techniques.” The document includes references to the following: The 
Karachi Plot, the Heathrow Plot, the “Second Wave” plots, the Guraba Cell, Issa al-Hindi, Abu Talha al-Pakistani, 
Hambali’s Capture, Jafaar al-Tayyar, the Dirty Bomb Plot, Sajid Badat, and Shkai, Pakistan. The document also 
asserts that “[pjrior to the use of enhanced measures” the CIA “acquired little threat information or significant 
actionable intelligence” from KSM. As detailed in the summary, KSM was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques immediately upon entering CIA custody. 

1468 CIA classified statement for the record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael 
V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007; and accompanying Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence hearing transcript for April 12, 2007, entitled, “Hearing on Central Intelligence Agency Detention and 
Interrogation Program” (DTS #2007-1563). 

1469 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 

effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 
Volume II. 

mi 1 Mi mi hi nii'i 

Page 264 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



CIA represented led to the arrest of Dhiren Barot or the thwarting of his plotting. 1470 The review 
found that the intelligence that alerted security officials to: (1) the potential terrorist threat posed 
by one or more U.K.-based operatives with the alias “Issa”; (2) Issa’s more common alias, “Issa 
al-Hindi”; (3) Issa al-Hindi’s location; (4) Issa al-Hindi’s true name, Dhiren Barot; and (5) 
information on Dhiren Barot’s U.K. plotting, all came from intelligence sources unrelated to the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 1471 Contrary to CIA representations, reporting from 
CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques did not lead to the arrest 
of Dhiren Barot or the thwarting of the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot, nor did KSM 
provide the first reporting on a U.K.-based “Issa.” Rather, the disruption of the United Kingdom 
Urban Targets Plot and the identification and arres t of Dhiren Barot (aka Iss a al-Hindi) 
attributable to the efforts of U.K. law enforcemen^^^^^^^^H^^H||, as well as HH 
mmm t a review of computer hard drives], [collected 

communications], and reporting from detainees in the custody of the U.S. Department of Justice, 
the U.S. military, and a foreign government. While records indicate KSM did provide the initial 
information on “Issa’s” tasking to conduct casings in the United States prior to the September 11, 
2001, attacks, 1472 as well as information on an email address related to Issa, 1473 this information 
was provided within a larger body of fabricated reporting KSM provided on Issa. The CIA was 
unable to distinguish between the accurate and inaccurate reporting, and KSM’s varied reporting 
led CIA officers to conclude that KSM was “protecting” Issa 1474 and “obstructing [the CIA’s] 
ability to acquire good information” on the U.K.-based operative well after the CIA ceased using 
enhanced interrogation techniques against KSM. 1475 



1470 CIA records indicate that CIA detainees largely provided corroborative reporting on Abu Issa, aka Dhiren Barot, 
and that CIA representations that “most, if not all, of the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program 
would not have been discovered or reported by other means,” is not supported by CIA records. See intelligence 
chronology in Volume II for additional details. 

1471 Dhiren Barot’s arrest by U.K. authorities was also unrelated to reporting from the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. See information in this summary, as well as the intelligence chronology in Volume II. 

1472 When Issa’s U.S. casing reports were found on Abu Talha al-Pakistani’s computer, KSM stated that he did not 

know of any al-Qa’ida plans, by Abu Talha or anyone else, to targeUh^Citig^ip/Citibanl^uilding^rudential 
Group building, or the United Nations building in New York. ( See 1477 ) 

Nonetheless, KSM’s reporting on Issa’s travel to the U.S. was later corroborated by FBI reporting and individuals 
detained by foreign governments. See FBI IIR (26 AUG 2004) and TTIC Special Analysis Report 

2004-28H, entitled, “Homeland: Threat Assessment for lMF/World Bank Annual Meeting, 2-3 October 2004,” 
dated September 28, 2004; and DIRECTOR ■■ See also reissue, DIRECTOR 



1473 10948 (222101Z MAR 03) 

1474 A CIA officer’s comment on talking points prepared for “ADC1 Tuesday Briefing of Kerry/Edwards” on Issa al- 
Hindi states that “KSM didn’t decode the [phone] numbers for us (he just provided info on how lie may have 
encoded the numbers — which when used didn’t result in valid numbers) [an] address with the number didn’t exist; it 
was a dead end, and it appears KSM was protecting [Issa] al-Hindi.” See email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
[REDACTED], with multiple ccs; subject: “IMMEDIATE: al-Hindi TPs for ADCI Tuesday Briefing of 
Kerry/Edwards” ; date: August 30, 20 04, at 02:51 PM, whic h contains comments on previous drafts of talking points. 

from: to: 




Page 265 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



According to information providedtotheCIA by the United 
Kingdom, Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi, appeared in reporting related to 

“terrorist training” and participation “in jihad in occupied Kashmir, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and 
Malaysia throughout the 1990s.” 1476 Information concerning a boo^vrittenbyDhiren Barot 
(under the alias “Esa al-Hindi”) on jihad in Kashmir appeared in BH^^HHl and CIA 
intelligence records as early as December 1999. 1477 At that time U.K. authorities had a number 
of U.K.-based extremists under investigation, including Moazzem Begg. 1478 Begg’s Maktabah 
al- Ansar bookstore was describ ed as “a known jihadist gathe ring place.” 1479 According to 
intelligence reports, in 1999, ‘Abu Issa’ stayed with Moazzem 

Begg 1480 at the Maktabah al-Ansar bookstore in Birmingham, U.K.,” and that this “Issa” was in 
contact with other U.K. extremists. 1481 According to reporting, Begg was associated with two 
“al-Qa’ida operatives” arrested in 1999 for their involvement in terrorist plotting and later 
released. 1482 A report from August 1, 2000, stated that U.K. authorities raided Begg’s bookstore 
and found an invoice for 5000 copies of a book entitled, “The Army of Madina in Kashmir.” 1483 
A search of computers associated with the two aforementioned “al-Qa’ida operatives” described 
the book as their “project” written by “a brother from England who was a Hindu and became a 
Muslim.” According to the reporting, the U.K. -based author of the book “got training in 
Afghanistan” before fighting jihad in Kashmir. 1484 (The book advocates for “worldwide jihad” 
and the author is listed on the cover of the book as “Esa al-Hindi.” 1485 ) Additional reporting on 




(242144Z AUG 04) 



1478 A June 25, 2004, CIA Serial Flyer entitled, “Guantanamo Bay Detainee Moazzem Begg’s Links to Active 
Operatives,” states that, after being captured in February 2002 and being held in U.S. military custody, “Begg has 
been cooperative in debriefings and has provided background information and descriptions of a number of his past 
associates that have helped shed light on the extent of the Islamic extremist network in the United Kingdom and its 
ties to al-Qa’ida.” According to the CIA report, in June 2004, Begg’s “description and resulting sketch of UK 
contact Issa al-Hindi” — whose true identity was then unknown — “was compared to a still shot of an unidentified 
man taken from a surveillance video of UK extremists.” The comparison “revealed that the man in the video 
probably [was] the elusive Issa al-Hindi.” Begg co-owned the Maktabah al-Ansar bookshop in Birmingham, United 
Kingdom, that would later be found to have published a book written by “Esa al-Hindi” that was well known among 
U.K. extremists, “The Army o f Madinah in Kashm ir.” 

1479 See [REDACTED] 72330 and “Guantanamo Bay Detainee Moazzem Begg’s Links to Active 

Operatives,” June 2004 for intelligence referencing earlier reporting. See also open source reporting on U.K. raids 
of the bookstore in the year 2000, as well as subsequent raids, including. “Bookshop linked to Bin Laden’s 
‘General,” The Telegraph^faXed February 1, 2007. 

1480 On April 2004/B|B relayed information acquired from Sajid Badat, the other U.K. “Issa.” Badat stated 
that “anyone who had been involved with jihad in Britain since the mid-90s” would know the other Issa, naming 
among o ther ind ividuals, Moazzem Begg. See HHII 1 19907 (23 1744Z APR 04). 

1481 CI^jjjjj^^^262213Z SEP 03) (cable referencing information collected in 1999) 

1482 Bfl^^B 49612 £81213ZJUL03) 

1483 [REDACTED] 72330^ (cable discusses historical reporting). See also “Bookshop linked to 
Bin Laden’s ‘General,” The Telegraph , dated February 1, 2007. 

1484 | 

1485 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the “Study highlights and mischaracterizes” this intelligence because 
the author of “The Army of Madinah in Kashmir,” is not identified in the intelligence report. The CIA Response 
states that the report “identifies the author only as ‘an Afghanistan-trained British convert writing about Hindu 
atrocities in Kashmir.’” Notwithstanding the CIA’s Response, the Committee found the intelligence report 
references the book, “The Army of Madinah in Kashmir,” and describes the author as “a brother from England who 
was a Hindu and became a Muslim about six years ago” and who “got training in Afghanistan then went to fight in 
Kashmir.” According to open sources, the 1999boo^dvocated^woridwidej^ in order to bring nations “to 

TOP 

Page 266 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



“Issa” appeared in CIA records again in July 2001. At that time the FBI reported that Ahmed 
Ressam, who was in a U.S. federal prison (arrested by U.S. border patrol with explosives in his 
vehicle in December 1999), reported that a U.K. national named “Issa” attended a terrorist 
training camp associated with al-Qa’ida in Afghanistan. 1486 

In February 2002, Moazzem Begg was arrested at an al-Qa’ida safe 
house in Islamabad, Pakistan, and subsequently transferred to U.S. military custody at 
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. 1487 While still in Pakistani custody, Begg provided reporting on U.K.- 
based extremists in the context of terrorist training camps, including information on an individual 
who would play a key role in “Issa’s” identification and capture, “Sulayman” (variant 
Sulyman). 1488 In May 2002, the CIA was seeking to learn more about “Sulyman.” 1489 HH 
[foreign partner] authorities informed the CIA that Sulyman was a person of interest to U.K. 
authorities for his connections t o U.K . extremists and his suspected travel to Kashmir multiple 
times for terro rist activity. T he [foreign partner] further reported t hat Sulyman may have 
been involved The 

report provided^y^^^^f[fbreign partner] included Sulyman’ s likely true name, Nisar Jilal, as 
well as his date of birth and place of employment. 1490 



Beginning in mid-2002, there was increasing intelligence reporting 
on one or more U.K.-based individuals referred to as “Issa” who were connected to KSM and 
possibly planning attacks in the United Kingdom. 1491 This reporting resulted in efforts by U.K. 
authoritie s to identify and locate this “Issa.” 1492 In August 2002, 1493 and again in October 2002, 
[HUhl^ [foreign partner] informed the CIA that it was seeking to identify a U.K. -based “Abu 
Issa” who was reportedly “an English speaker and trusted [terrorist] operative.” 1494 



In September 2002, an email address (“Lazylozy”) was recovered 
during raids related to the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh that would later be found to be in 



their knees.” An Internet archive search for the title of the book, “The Army of Madinah in Kashmir,” found the 
book prominently advertised among the “Recommended Products” in 2002 on the website for the Maktabah al- 
Ansar bookstore (www.maktabah.net/books/images/kashmir.jpg: internet archive 2002). The website archive from 
2002 states that the author “Esa al-Hindi” converted “to Islam at the age of 20” and recalls his “personal experience 
in occupied Kashmir fighting the Indian forces.” The bookstore’s website and related jihadi websites list the author 
of the book as “Esa Al-Hindi.” CIA cables suggest it was not until June 2003 that the CIA conducted an internet 
search for “The Army of Madinah in Kashmir.” When the search was conducted, the CIA fou nd “it is one of the 
recommended reads featured” on the website of the Maktabah al-Ansar bookstore. See ALEC (052206Z 

JUN 03). As noted, the same information on the book was prominently listed on the same website more than a year 
earlier. 



I486 



DIRECTOR 



(23JUL01); DIRECTOR 



| (20JUL01) 



1487 June 25, 2004, CIA Serial Flyer entitled, “Guantanamo Bay Detainee Moazzem Begg’s Links to Active 
Operatives.’ 

I; DIRECTOR | 



DIRECTOR! 

DIRECTOR I 

J 77599, 

1491 See 2002 reporting detailed in the Volume II intelligence chronology. At this point it was still unknown how 
many Issas the reporting was referencing. In September 2003, however, a CIA officer assessed there were “two (or 





three) Abu Issas” in intell igence reportin 

1492 [REDACTED] 80508 

1493 [REDACTED] 80508 

1494 [REDACTED] 83917 

- TOP SECRET^ 



99093 (02093 1Z SEP 03). 




/NOF O R N 



Page 267 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



fl NOFORN 



contact with “Issa.” Information on the email address was disseminated in intelligence 
reporting. 1495 The same email address was foun^)r^Iarch 1, 2003, during the raids that led to 
the captuie of KSM. CIA records indicate that sought coverage for the email 

account. 1496 Within days, the Intelligence Community was collecting information from the 
account and had reported that the user of the account was in contact with other covered accounts 
and that the message content was in English. 1497 

KSM was captured on March 1, 2003. On March |, 2003, KSM 
was rendered to CIA custody and immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques including at least 183 applications of the waterboard interrogation technique — until 
March 25, 2003. 9 During the month of March 2003, KSM provided information on a variety 
of matters, including on a U.K. -based Abu Issa al-Britani. The information provided by KSM on 
“Issa” included both accurate and inaccurate information. At the time, the CIA was unable to 
discern between the two. During interrogation sessions in March 2003, KSM first discussed an 
Issa al-Britani among a list of individuals who were connected to KSM’s Heathrow Airport 
plotting. 1499 On March 17, 2003, KSM stated that, prior to the September 11, 2001, attacks, he 
tasked Issa to travel to the United States to “collect information on economic targets.” On March 
21, 2003, KSM was waterboarded for failing to confirm interrogators’ suspicions that KSM 
sought to recruit individuals from among the African American Muslim community. KSM then 
stated that he had talked with Issa about contacting African American Muslim groups prior to 
September 1 1, 2001. 1500 The next day KSM was waterboarded for failing to provide more 
information on the recruitment of African American Muslims. One hour after the waterboarding 
session, KSM stated that he tasked Issa “to make contact with black U.S. citizen converts to 
Islam in Montana,” and that he instructed Issa to use his ties to Shaykh Abu Hamza al-Masri, a 
U.K.-based Imam, to facilitate his recruitment efforts. 1501 KSM later stated that Issa’s mission 
in the United States was to surveil forests to potentially ignite forest fires. 1502 During this period, 
KSM was confronted with a series of emailsthati^ the aforementioned “Lazylozy” email 5 
account and another email account KSM confirmed that the emails were 

established for communication between Issa al-Britani and Am mar al-Baluchi a nd stated that 
Issa used the “Lazylozy” account, and that al-Baluchi used the account. 1503 (A 

month later the CIA reported that Issa did not use the “Lazylozy” email address, but the other 
email address.) 1504 Over the next six months, KSM retracted or provided conflicting reporting on 
Issa. On June 22, 2003, CIA interrogators reported that “[KSM] nervously explained to 





1495 

1496 AI£CH| (102238Z MAR 03) 

Wi te on E-m ail Activity], 

Messages Derived from |H Coverage , CIA ^ 

1498 See KSM detainee review in Volume III for additional details. 

^There are no other records indicati ng that Dhi ren Barot, aka Issa, was con nected to K SM’s Heathrow Plotting. 

^^^ 10828 (151310Z MAR 03); B|^^Hl0815 (141819Z MAR 03); BHHB 10871 (172037Z MAR 03) 

1500 10932 (212132Z MAR 03)ddl 10921 (21 1046Z MAR 03) 

1501 10942 (221610Z MAR 03). According to KSM, Shaykh abu Hamza al-Masri had contacts in 

Montana. 

1502 DIRECTOR (3 122^^4A^03); 10942 (22152 1Z MAR 03); 11070 (3021 15Z 

MAR 03), disseminated as 



1503 

1504 ALEC 



10948 (222101Z MAR 03) 

| (182330Z APR 03) 

TOP SECRET// 



Page 268 of 499 



// NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



debriefer that he was under ‘enhanced measures’ when he made these claims” about terrorist 
recruitment in Montana, and “simply told his interrogators what he thought they wanted to 
hear.” 1505 A CIA Headquarters response cable stated that the CIA’s ALEC Station believed 
KSM’s fabrication claims were “another resistance/manipulation ploy” and characterized KSM’s 
contention that he “felt ‘forced’ to make admissions” under enhanced interrogation techniques as 
“convenient excuses.” As a result, ALEC Station urged CIA officers at the detention site to get 
KSM to reveal “who is the key contact person in Montana?” 1506 By June 30, 2005, ALEC 
Station had concluded that KSM’s reporting about African American Muslims in Montana was 
“an outright fabrication.” 1507 



On April 4, 2003, the CIA provided reporting to the U.K. on 
“Issa,” stating that “we realize that Abu Issa is a target of interest to your service.” The 
information compiled by the CLA included an August 2002 report (unrelated to the CIA s 
Detention and Interrogation Program) that stated that a U.K. national “Abu Issa Al-Pakistani 
was slated by al-Qa’ida for “terrorist operations against foreign targets.” 1508 On April 18, 2003, 
a ^Bcabletothe U.K. relayed that the correct email for Abu Issa al-BritanUs 
(‘^^HHjlHH”). It further noted that “the Abu Issa acc ount” is “under coverage, and 

____ The same cable notes that KSM had changed his reporting on Issa’s 
background. According to the cable, KSM originally stated Issa was of Pakistani origin, but now 
claimed that Issa was of Indian origin. The CIA wrote that KSM’s reporting: 



“tracks with reporting from another detainee. As you are aware, Feroz Abbasi 
and other detainees at Guantanmo [sic] Bay have described an Abu Issa that 
worked for the al-Qa’ida media Committee run by KSM. . . Abassi [at] one time 
related that Abu Issa described himself as Indian.” 1509 



(:pS//|^ 2003, cable noted that the email address 
associated with Abu Issa (“HH|HH^^|^’) was used and tracked to a specific address in 
Wembley, a suburb of London. 1510 



On May 28, 2003, a CIA cable documented intelligence obtained 
by the FBI from interviews of James Ujaama (aka Bilal Ahmed), who was in FBI custody. 
Ujaama, who had spent time in the U.K. extremist community, reported on an “Issa” in the U.K. 
who was known as “Issa al-Hindi” and was “good friends with a Pakistani male named 
Sulyman. 



>>1511 



had already disseminated intelligence indicating that Sulyman was 




12095 (222049Z JUN 03) 

(260043Z JUN 03). No individuals related to KSM’s reporting were ever identified in Montana. 

KSM also retracted his statement connecting Issa to the Heathrow Airport plotting. There are no CIA recoids to 
indicate that either U.K.-based Issas (Sajid Badat or Dhiren Barot) was ever involved in the Heathrow Airport 
plotting. See intelligence chronology in Volume II and information on the Heathrow plotting in this summary for 
additional information. 

(302258Z JUN 03) 




1507 ALEC 

1508 ALEC 

1509 ALEC 

1510 ALEC 

15 It 



The Committee did not have access to U.S. military detainee reporting. 



(182330Z APR 03). 

052206Z JUN 03). See also ALEC and I 
280438Z (2 80746Z MAY 03) 

TOP SECRET -/. 

Page 269 of 499 



|93759 (160919Z MAY 03). 

//NOFOR N 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



// NOFORN 



likely Nisar Jalal, based on reporting from U.S military detainee Moazzem Begg. 1512 Ujaama 
provided the FBI with the name of the U.K. law office where Sulyman (aka Nisar Jal al) worked , 
which matched reporting provided to the CIA by H [foreign partner] authorities in HHB 
2002. 1513 

On June 2, 2003, KSM was shown a sketch of Issa al-Hindi 
provided to the CIA by the FBI and based on reporting by James Ujaama. KSM stated that the 
sketch did not look like anyone he knew. 1514 

(TS//^^^^^^m^/NE) A June 5, 2003, cable states that the FBI had “gleaned new clues 
about Issa in recent days from detainees, including [from Moazzem] Begg,” who was in U.S. 
military custody. According to the cable^Begg told FBI s pecial agents “that Issa is likely fro m 
Wembley, Alperton, or Sudbury.” A noted that 

[technical collection indicated that Issa was located in 
Wembley]. 1515 U.K. officials highlighted that lssa’s reported “good friend,” Nisar Jilal (aka 
Sulyman), also had an address in Wembley. 1516 

On September 13, 2003, KSM explained a coding system for 
telephone numbers for Issa that produced no results. 1517 On October 16, 2003, KSM identified a 
picture of an individual known as “Nakuda,” as Abu Issa al-Britani. 1518 CIA relayed this 
information to U.K. officials, who responded that this identification was “extremely 
unlikely.” 1519 CIA detainee Khallad bin Attash was shown the same photograph and stated that 
the photo “definitely” was not Issa. 1520 CIA officers wrote that KSM “is obstructing our ability 
to acquire good information” on Issa and noting that KSM has “misidentified photos when he 
knows we are fishing” and “misleads us on telephone numbers.” 1521 A cable from the CIA’s 
ALEC Station stated that “KSM appears to have knowingly led us astray on this potentially 



>002|. Ujaama provided 



1, 2002 

1 280438Z |280746Z MAY 03), ■■■ 77599, 
detailed information on Issa al-Hindi, including a description, biographical data, and information on Issa al-Hindi’s 
con tacts, whic h could be used to locate and identify Issa al-Hindi. 
i5i4 !^^Hii909 (022030Z JUN 03) 

15,5 ALEC^^B (052206Z JUN 03) 



1516 



[REDACTED] 94931 



|. The U.K. also reported that, in June of 1999, an individual assessed 



to be Issa provided Moazzem Begg with telephone numbers for a lawyer known as Sulyman. See [REDACTED] 



95463 

1517 




|, [REDACTED]; cc: 

date: October 16, 2003, at 5:25:13 PM. See also email from: 
[REDACTED]; cc: 




ping Mukie on-cable coming; date: April II, 2003, at 5:00:12 PM; and ALEC 

TOP SECRET/, 

Page 270 of 499 



; subject: KSM and Khallad Issues; 
1; to: [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [R EDACTE D]; subject: Some things to 

(222153Z APR 03). 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 




important, albeit historical, lead [the phone numbers] to one of our most hotly pursued 
targets.” 1522 

* n October 2003, CIA officers wrote: 



“even with all we have learned from our on-going partnership with [the United 
Kingdom] and various detainees, we have not been able to obtain accurate 
locational information, including confirmed phone numbers and timely 
information on email addresses. Our latest information, based on [foreign 
partner reporting] and a detainee’s assessment [Moazzem Begg in U.S. 
military custody], is that Issa is believed to currently be located in Wembley, a 
suburb of London.” 1523 




) In January 2004, 



urged [foreign partner] officials to 



interview Nisar Jilal (aka Sulyman) “in light of Ujaama’s repo rting” from the FBI 



confirming a relationship between Issa al-Hin di and Nisar Jilal. 15 " 4 Instead, 

partner] officials began planning an operation ^ J 

mssm 1525 



[foreign 




One individual personally 

saw Issa al-Hindi on June 2003, in the Wembley area of South London. Based on the FBI 
reporting and the email coverage, U.K. authorities continuously surveilled Nisar Jilal (aka 

a man) and photographed his associates. 1526 A specific s eries of photographs was passed by 
[foreign partner] officials to CIA officials depicting an individual whom CIA 

officials wrote “bears a striking resemblance” to the Issa al-Hindi sketch provided by Moazzem 
Begg, the detainee in U.S. military custody. 1527 The CIA would later write that Moazzem Bcgg’s 
“description and resulting sketch of U.K. contact Issa al-Hindi” was “compared to a still shot of 
an unidentified man taken from a surveillance video of UK extremists,” and the comparison 
“revealed that the man in the video probably [was] the elusive Issa al-Hindi.” 1528 



feedback.” 1529 



With the suspicion that the photo was Issa al-Hindi, the CIA’s 
| requested the photo be “shown to detainees” and requested “immediate 
According to a CIA cable dated June 17, 2004, the suspected Issa al-Hindi 



1522 ALEC ■■ (210159Z OCT 03) 

1523 Draft cable included in an email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

“Abu Issa al-Hindi Targeting Study”; date: October 22, 2003, at 6:49:41 PM. 



ALEC 



ALEC 



22359 



See also [REDACTED] email to: 



Hi 22246 

and others; subject: “For Immed. Coord: Al-Hindi ID Highlight”; date: June 17, 2004, at 

3:06:29 PM. 

1527 [REDACTED] 22406 (04 9023184 I17/JUN/2004) 

1528 A June 25, 2004, CIA Serial Flyer entitled, “Guantanamo Bay Detainee Moazzem Begg’s Links to Active 
Operatives.” 

1529 [REDACTED] 22406 (04 9023184 I17/JUN/2004) 



Page 271 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



// NQFORN 



photograph was shown to KSM, who “confirmed that the unidentified photo depicts al- 
Hindi.” 1530 

c ) By July 2, 2004, ^R| [foreign partner] authorities had infor med 
the CIA that they felt “confident” that Issa’s true name was “Dhiren Barot.” According to RHL 
>orting, while under surveillance, Iss a was observed talking for an extended period of timeHl 

^ in the vicinity where James Ujaama (in FBI cus tody) had 

placed Issa. 1531 HR [foreign partner] authorities observed that Issa drove HHHI to a 
residence in Wembley. A record search of the address in Wembley by U.K. authorities identified 
a passport application with a photograph that matched the Issa under surveillance. The name on 
the passport application was Issa’s true name, Dhiren Barot. 1532 



Once identified, Dhiren Barot remained under U.K. surveillance as 
the U.K. collected additional information on Dhiren Barot and his activities. On July 2004, 
an al-Qa’ida associate named Abu Talha al-Pakistani was arres ted and detained by Pakistani 
officials. 1533 CIA records indicate that the arrest occurred after R^HRRRHR^HHHI 
^^Hjdentified when and where Abu Talha al-Pakistani wouldbeat^^^^RR^^^RT 53 * On 
July R[, 2004, after Abu Talha’ s capture, Pakistani authorities conducted a series of raids and 
seized a laptop computer that was shared with the U.S. government. 1535 The computer was 
suspected of belonging to senior al-Qa’ida member, Hamza Rabi’a, 1536 and contained a series of 
undated, English-language casing reports. In all, the computer contained over 500 photographs, 
maps, sketches, and scanned documents associated with apparent casings. 1537 

(TS//^^H^HR#NE) On July 31, 2004, KSM was questioned about the casing reports. 
KSM stated that he did not know of any al-Qa’ida plans by Abu Talha or anyone else to target 
the Citigroup/Citibank building, Prudential Group building, or the United Nations building in 



1530 CIA records indicate that other detainees also identified this indiv idual as Iss a al-Hindi. 

1531 See ^■^^■^RRH 280438Z (280746Z MAY 03) and ■■■ 77599 



Ujaama 

provided detailed information on Issa al-Hindi, including a description, biographical data, and information on Issa 
al-Hindi’s contacts, which could be used to locate and identify Issa al-Hindi. There are no specific CIA records of 
James Ujaama providing exact location data for Issa al-Hindi. As noted, however, senior CIA personnel expressed 
frustration that the U.K. was not sharing all known information on their investigations, writing in August 2003 that 
‘‘[the FBI is] clearly working closely with the [U.K. service] on these matters and [the CIA is] at the mercy” of what 
it is told. As described in this summary, James Ujaama was in FBI custody. 

232261 




1534 3924 

[REDACTED]; cc: 



J; email from: [REDACTED]; to [REDACTED], 

|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: DRAFT DCI SPECIAL ITEM - 

14Jul04; date: July 14, 2004, at 03:48 PM. This information was obtained from sources unrelated to the CIA’s 
Det ention and Inter rogat ion Program. 

1535 3889 

1536 Email fromT RU^^^^H; to: James Pavitt, [REDACTE D!, Rodriguez, John 

RMuddJRED ACTED], 

WBB8BU- [REDACTED], cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Laptop docex from 

recent raid may yield pre-election threat information; date: JulyH* 2004, at 07:33 AM. 

1537 See Terrorist Thre a t Integration Cente r , Terrorist Threats t o US Interests Wo r ldwide. See also I 

1; and 




TOP SECRET/ 



7NOFORN 



Page 272 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



New York described in the documents. 1538 On the same day, Abu Talha, who was in the custody 
of a foreign government, stated the “U.S. casing reports were from Abu Issa.” 1539 lssa, aka 
Dhiren Barot, was still under surveillance by U.K. authorities at this time. 1540 



On August 1, 2004, Abu Talha was shown a photograph of Dhiren 
Barot and “immediately identified him as Issa.” Abu Talha — who was cooperating with foreign 
government authorities — described Issa’s visit to Pakistan from February to April 2004, during 
which he stated “Issa” (aka Dhiren Barot) met with Hamza al-Rabi’a on multiple occasions to 
“discuss operations in the United Kingdom and targets already cased in the United States.” Abu 
Talha stated that Issa believed his activities and identity were not known to the authorities. 1541 



An August 3, 2004, cable stated that “analysis of information on 
[the] hard drive” of the computer seized “revealed a document. . . that is a detailed study on the 
methodologies to affect a terrorist attack.” According to the cable, “the study describes the 
operational and logistics environment in the UK.” The document is divided into two main parts. 
The first part includes seven chapters on the topic entitled “rough presentation for gas limo 
project.” The second part is entitled “rough presentation for radiation (dirty bomb) project.” 

The “gas limo project” section concludes that the most feasible option would be to use a 
limousine to deliver explosives, while the “dirty bomb” project section states that smoke 
detectors could be used to deliver the radioactive substance americium- 147. The document 
proposes to use 10,000 smoke detectors as part of an explosive device to spread this radioactive 
element. In addition, the document discusses the vulnerabilities of trains and the possibilities of 
hijacking and utilizing gasoline tankers to conduct a terrorist attack. 1542 

(TS^HHIH^F) O n th e same day the analysis was disseminated, August 3, 2004, 
U.K. authorities arrested Dhiren Barot and 12 ot her individuals, and seized “over 100 hard- 
drives.” 1543 On August 7, 2004, the U .K. sha red associated with Dhiren 

Barot with the U.S. government. The [information provided] included copies of casing 

reports related to the United States and the United Kingdom. 1544 On August 17, 2004, U.K. 
authorities charged nine individuals in relation to the Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi, 
investigation. 1545 U.K. authorities informed the CIA that “[d]espite intelligence about the 
activities of the network, the recent charges of the individuals involved or linked to this planning 



1538 £ 

1339 E ma ji from: 

Mudd, [RED ACTED], 

[REDACTED], 



, Rodriguez, John P. 




, [REDACTED]; subject: Laptop docex from 



recent raid may yield pre-election threat information; date: July B, 2004, at 07:35 AM. 



1540 Email from: 
[REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], 




j; to: James Pavitt [REDACTED], 



; cc: 



1541 DIRECTOR 

1542 DIR ECTOR 

,s43 cia mhi 





1, Rodriguez, John P. Mudd, 



, [REDACTED]; subject: Laptop docex from recent raid may 



yield pre-election threat information; date: Ju ly B 2004, at 07:35 AM. 

■ jmHMMHBL See also reissue, DIRECTOR 
(032140Z A UG 04) 

(261529Z AUG 04) / MHBHHT 



1344 CIA Operational Developments Against A1 Qa’ida Worldwide, 09 August 2004, 1700 Hours. 

1545 



TOP SECRET// 



; [REDACTED] 25533 (231257Z AUG 04) 
)04, 1700 Horn 

/NOFORN 



Page 273 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



were mainly possible owing to the recovery of terrorist-related materials during searches of 
associated properties and vehicles following their arrests.” 1546 



On August 23, 2004, the CIA received an update from K| 
[foreign partner] authorities that noted the “research conducted by the [Barot] network into 
central London hotels and railway stations [is] likel^o be exploratory rather than representing a 
detailed operational plan.” 1547 A report from the [foreign partner] stated: 



“material that is emerging from [the United Kingdom] investigation, combined 
with detainee reporting from senior al-Qa’ida members [an apparent reference 
to Abu Talha al-Pakistani’s reporting on U.K. targeting in Pakistani custody], 
strongly suggests that Barot’ s cell was planning a terrorist attack in the U.K., 
what is not yet clear is how close the cell was to mounting an attack or what, if 
any, targets had been finalized.” 1548 



On August 30, 2004, talking points on the Dhiren Barot case were 
prepared by CIA officers. A CIA officer wrote that KSM’s reporting on contact numbers for 
Issa was “a dead end” and “that it appears KSM was protecting al-Hindi.” 1549 The talking points 
highlighted the cyber capabilities enabled by the USA PATRIOT Act in the investigation of 
Dhiren Barot, stating: 



“Probably the most important intelligence tool we used in breaking this 
[Dhiren Barot] case was our cyber capability enabled by the USA Patriot Act. 
From beginning to end cyber played a role, but it was not the only tool that was 
used. HUMINT and SIGINT threads were followed and contributed to our 



1546 [REDACTED] 25533 (231257Z AUG 04). See also CIA (242144Z AUG 04). Internal CIA 

communications related to August 30, 2004, CIA talking points concerning Dhiren Barot state that a sketch of Issa 
al-Hindi, by U.S. military detainee Moazzem Begg, ultimately played a central role, as a s urveill ance photo of a 
suspected Issa al-Hindi “looked so much like the sketch.” The CIA talking points identify |H [technical 
collection] capabilities as the CIA’s primary contributioiU^heinvestigation, stating: “Probably the most important 
intelligence tool we used in breakinjUhis case was our^^BIB^f [technical collection] enabled by the USA 
Patriot Act. From beginning to endfH [technical collection] played a role, but it was not the only tool that wa s 
used. HUMINT and SIGINT threads were fo llowed and contributed to our understanding of the 

[technical collection] and also in finding new [technical collection] leads. Exploitation of computers and other 
information obtained in raids before and during the case also contributed significantly, as did surveillance. However, 
none of these tools are stand-alones. Good old fashioned hard targeting and analysis of these maddeningly vague 
and disparate and incomplete threads of information was the glue that put it all together.” See “Capture of Al-Qa’ida 
Operative Abu Issa al-Hindi (aka Dhiren Barot, aka Abu Issa al-Britani),” multiple iterations of talking points, 
including the revised version cited, found in an email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], with multiple ccs; 
subject: “IMMEDIATE: al-Hindi TPs for ADCI Tuesday Briefing of Kerry/Edwards”; date: August 30, 2004, at 
02:51 PM. 

1547 [REDACTED] 25533 (231257Z AUG 04) 

1548 [REDACTED] 25533 (231257Z AUG 04) 



1549 In an email, a CIA officer commented on talking points prepared for “ADCI Tuesday Briefing of 
Kerry/Edwards” on Issa al-Hindi, stating that “KSM didn’t decode the numbers for us (he just provided info on how 
he may have encoded the numbers — which when used didn’t result in valid numbers) and address with the number 
didn’t exist; it was a dead end, and it appears KSM was protecting al-Hindi.” See email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
[REDACTED], with multiple ccs; subject: “IMMEDIATE: al-Hindi TPs for ADCI Tuesday Briefing of 
Kerry/Edwards”; date: August 30, 2004, at 02:51 PM, which contains comments on previous drafts of talking points. 
T OP SECRE T//^^^^Mjj^^^BB|M# NOFORN 



Page 274 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



understanding of the cyber messages and also in finding new cyber leads. 
Exploitation of computers and other information obtained in raids before and 
during the case also contributed significantly, as did surveillance. However, 
none of these tools are stand-alones. Good old fashioned hard targeting and 
analysis of these maddeningly vague and disparate and incomplete threads of 
information was the glue that put it all together.” 1550 



On September 10, 2004, the Interagency Intelligence Committee 
on Terrorism (IICT) disseminated a report entitled, “Homeland: Reappraising al-Qa’ida’s 
Election Threat,” which states: 



“We do not know the projected timeframe for any attacks Issa was planning to 
execute in the UK, but it is unlikely he would have been ready to strike in the 
near term. Upon returning to the UK in mid-2004, Issa attempted to gather 
materials to build explosives for future attacks in the UK. . . [U.K.] authorities 
have been unable to locate any explosives precursors, and it is possible he had 
not yet acquired the necessary materials at the time of his detention. The 
detainee [Abu Talha al-Pakistani] also noted that some of Issa’ s operatives 
required further training — most likely in explosives — and that [Issa] intended 
to send an associate to Pakistan for three months to receive instruction from 
senior al-Qa’ida explosives experts.” 1551 

The assessment adds, “Issa appears to have been in an early phase of operational planning at the 
time of his capture.” 1552 

I n November 2004, authorities informed the CIA that “it was 
largely through the investigation of Nisar Jalal’s associates that [the U.K.] was able to identify 
Dhiren Barot as being [identifiable] with Issa al-Hindi.” 1553 

A December 14, 2004, FBI Intelligence Assessment entitled, “The 
Gas Limos Project: An al-Qa’ida Urban Attack Plan Assessment,” evaluated “the feasibility and 
lethality of this plot” based on “documents captured during raids” against “al-Qa’ida operatives 
in Pakistan and the United Kingdom in July and August 2004, and on custodial interviews 
conducted in the weeks following these raids.” The FBI concluded that “the main plot presented 
in the Gas Limos Project is unlikely to be as successful as described.” The report continued: 
“We assess that the Gas Limos Project, while ambitious and creative, is far-fetched.” 1554 



1550 “Capture of Al-Qa’ida Operative Abu Issa al-Hindi (aka Dhiren Barot, aka Abu Issa al-Britani)” multiple 
iterations of talking points, including the revised version cited, found in an email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
[REDACTED], with multiple ccs; subject: “IMMEDIATE: al-Hindi TPs for ADCI Tuesday Briefing of 
Kerry/Edwards”; date: August 30, 2004, at 02:51 PM. 

1551 Disseminated intelligence product by the IICT entitled, “Homeland: Reappraising al-Qa’ida’s “Election 
Threat,” dated September 10, 2004. 

1552 Disseminated intelligence product by the IICT entitled, “Homeland: Reappraising al-Qa’ida’s “Election 
Threat,” dated September 10, 2004. 

1553 [REDACTED] 29759 

1554 FBI Intelligence Assessment, “The Gas Limos Project: An al-Qa’ida Urban Attack Plan Assessment,” dated 
December 14, 2004. 

mi 1 1 ( in i '''i in in hi 

Page 275 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



O n December 12, 2005, the CIA assessed that “while KSM tasked 
al-Hindi to go to the US to surveil targets, he was not aware of the extent to which Barot’s 
planning had progressed, who Issa’s co-conspirators were, or that Issa’s planning had come to 
focus on the UK.” 1555 

On November 7, 2006, Dhiren Barot was sentenced to life 
imprisonment in the United Kingdom. On May 16, 2007, Dhiren Barot’s sentence was reduced 
to 30 years after a British Court of Appeal found that expert assessments describing the plot as 
“amateurish,” “defective,” and unlikely to succeed were not provided to the sentencing judge. 1556 

5. The Identification, Capture, and Arrest of lyman Far is 



Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and produced critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, which 
thwarted plots and saved lives. Over a period of years, the CIA provided the “identification,” 
“arrest,” “capture,” “investigation,” and “prosecution” of lyman Faris as evidence for the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. These representations were 
inaccurate. lyman Faris was identified, investigated, and linked directly to al-Qa’ida prior to any 
mention of lyman Faris by KSM or any other CIA detainee. When approached by law 
enforcement, lyman Faris voluntarily provided information and made self-incriminating 
statements. On May 1, 2003, lyman Faris pled guilty to terrorism-related charges and admitted 
“to casing a New York City bridge for al Qaeda, and researching and providing information to al 
Qaeda regarding the tools necessary for possible attacks on U.S. targets.” 

Further Details: lyman Faris was an Ohio-based truck driver 
tasked by KSM with procuring “tools and devices needed to collapse suspension bridges,” as 
well as tools that could be used to derail trains. 1557 Faris had met KSM through his self- 
described “best friend,” Maqsood Khan, 1558 who was a Pakistan-based al-Qa’ida facilitator and 
Majid Khan’s uncle. 1559 

The identification and arrest of lyman Faris is one of the eight most 
frequently cited examples provided by the CIA as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. Over a period of years, CIA documents prepared for and 
provided to senior policymakers, intelligence officials, and the Department of Justice represent 
the identification, capture, and/or arrest of lyman Faris as an example of how “[k]ey intelligence 



1555 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED] and others; subject: “Re: need answer: request for any info 
deemed operationally sensitive be passed to brits concerning Dhiren Barot (aka Issa al-Hindi)”; date: December 12, 
2005, at 6:08:01 PM, in preparation of a document entitled, “Addendum in Respect of Disclosure - Al Hindi.pdf.” 

1556 See Royal Courts of Justice Appeal, Barot v R [2007], EWCA Crim 1119(16 May 2007). The expert 
assessments determined that the plotting involved “a professional-looking attempt from amateurs who did not really 
know what they were doing.” See also June 15, 2007, Bloomberg news article entitled, “Terrorist Gang Jailed for 
Helping Lo ndon an d New York Bomb Plot.” 

(242226Z MAR 03) (includes information acquired by the FBI on March 20, 2003) 

(261745Z MAR 03) 

(180200Z MAR 03). See also \ 



1557 WHDC 

1558 ALEC 

1559 ALEC 




T OP SECRET/, 




/NOFORN 



Page 276 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation techniques” had “enabled CIA to 
disrupt terrorist plots” and “capture additional terrorists.” 1560 The CIA further represented that 
the intelligence acquired from the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “otherwise 
unavailable” and “saved lives.” 1561 



1560 Italics included in CIA Memorandum to the Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” from March 2, 2005. 

1561 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see: 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 

“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[die CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within die United 
States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA-provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” (See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[germination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” ( See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” ( See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” (See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 



Page 277 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



F° r example, in a July 2003 CIA briefing for White House officials 
on the CIA interrogation program, the CIA represented that “[m]ajor threats were countered and 
attacks averted,” and that “[tjermination of this [CIA] program will result in loss of life, possibly 
extensive.” The CIA further represented that “the use of the [CIA’s enhanced interrogation] 
techniques has produced significant results” and “saved lives.” 1562 Under the heading, 
“RESULTS: MAJOR THREAT INFO,” a briefing slides states: 



‘KSM: Al-Qa’ida Chief of Operations. . . - Identification of Iyman Faris 



”1563 



Similarly, on February 27, 2004, DDO James Pavitt responded to 
the CIA Inspector General’s draft Special Review and included a representation related to Iyman 
Faris. Pavitt stated that the Inspector General’s Special Review should have come to the 
“conclusion that our efforts have thwarted attacks and saved lives,” and that “EITs (including the 
water board) have been indispensable to our successes.” 1564 Pavitt provided materials to the OIG 
that stated: 



“Specifically, as a result of the lawful use of EITs, KSM identified a truck 
driver who is now serving time in the United States for his support to al- 
Qa’ida.” 1565 

The final CIA Inspector General Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program,” published in May 2004, states: 



Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted .”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “SWIGERT and DUNBAR,” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, which 
provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1562 CIA memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program, ” dated 
July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. 



1563 Italics added. CIA memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared 
by CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program, ” 
dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. 

1564 Memorandum to the Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, dated 
February 27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Program’ (2003-7 123-IG),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Activities,” dated February 24, 2004. 

1565 Memorandum to the Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, dated 

February 27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Program’ (2003-7 123-IG),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Activities,” dated February 2 4, 2004. 

TOP SECRE Tfl^^^^^M^M/Z NOFORN 



Page 278 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 




“Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s information also led to the investigation and 
prosecution oflyman Fans , the truck driver arrested in early 2003 in 
Ohio.” 1566 

This passage in the CIA Inspector General Special Review was declassified and publicly 
released on August 24, 2009. 1567 

Likewise, information prepared by the CIA for CIA Director Leon 
Panetta in February 2009 on the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
states that the “CIA assesses... the techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” 
and that “most, if not all, of the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program 
would not have been discovered or reported by other means.” The document provides examples 
of “some of the key captures, disrupted plots, and intelligence gained from HVDs interrogated,” 
including the “ arrest of Iyman Faris.” 1568 In March 2009, the CIA provided a three-page 
document to the chairman of the Committee stating, “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the 
timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or 
reported by any other means,” before listing “Iyman Faris” as one of the “key captures” resulting 
from the CIA interrogation program. 1569 

The CIA provided similar inaccurate representations regarding the 
identification and capture of Iyman Faris in nine of the 20 documents and briefings provided to 
policymakers and the Department of Justice between July 2003 and March 2009. 1570 



1566 Italics added. CIA Office of Inspector General, Special Review - Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program, (2003-71 23-IG), May 2004. 

1567 The relevant sections of the Special Review were also cited in the OLC’s May 30, 2005, memorandum, which 
stated that “we understand that interrogations have led to specific, actionable intelligence,” and that “[w]e 
understand that the use of enhanced techniques in the interrogations of KSM, Zubaydah and others. . . has yielded 
critical information.” ( see memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence 
Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 
2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees, p. 9 (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 
11), citing Special Review at 86, 90-91). Like the Special Review, the OLC memorandum has been declassified 
with redactions. 

1568 Italics added. CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DC1A Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM).” The documents include “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document 
“EITs and Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and 
KSM),” “Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include 
“Background on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.” 

1569 CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on March 18, 2009, at 3:46 PM, entitled, 
“[SWIGERT and DUNBAR]” (DTS #2009-1258). 

1570 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 
Volume II. 




Page 279 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



A review of CIA operational cables and other records found that 
the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program and the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
played no role in the identification and capture of Iyman Faris. 1571 

CIA records indicate that Iyman Faris was known to the U.S. 
Intelligence Community prior to the attacks of September 1 1, 2001. On March 2001, the FBI 
opened an international terrorism investigation targeting Iyman Faris. 1572 According to CIA 
records, the “predication of the [FBI] Faris investigation was information provided by [foreign] 
authorities that [revealed] Faris’ telephone number had been called by Islamic extremists 
operating in France, Belgium, Turkey and Canada,” including “millennium bomber” Ahmad 
Ressam. 1573 Ressam, currently serving a 65-year U.S. prison term, was arrested on December 
14, 1999, en route to Los Angeles International Airport with explosives in the trunk of his car. 
According to CIA records, as “a result of a post 9/1 1 lead,” the FBI interviewed Iyman Faris 
shortly after the attacks of September 11, 2001. 1574 On November B. 2001, the FBI closed its 
investigation of Iyman Faris for unknown reasons. 1575 

On March 5, 2003, Majid Khan was taken into Pakistani 
custody. 1576 That sam^ay^IS^^overage of Majid Khan’s residence in Maryland indicated 
that Majid Khan’s ma de a suspicious phone call to an individual at a 

residence associated with Iyman Faris. 1577 The call included di scussion of Majid Khan’s 
possible arrest and potential FBI surveillance who asked the individual in Ohio 

if he had been approached and questioned. 1578 ^^^^^^^Bwarned the Ohio-based individual 
not to contact anyone using his phone. 1579 ThatsamedayT^BBHHBI informed FBI special 
agents that the other party to the intercepted conversation was Iyman Faris. 1580 By March 6, 
2003, the FBI had officially reopened its international terrorism investigation of Iyman Faris. 1581 



1571 The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that “we incorrectly stated or implied that KSM’s information 
led to the investigation of Faris.” Elsewhere, the CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[CIAJ imprecisely 
characterized KSM’s information as having ‘led’ to the investigation of Iyman Faris, rather than more accurately 
characterizing it as a key contribution to the investigation.” As described in more detail in Volume II, the CIA and 
FBI had significant information on Iyman Faris prior to any reporting from KSM. The CIA’s June 2013 Response 
also states that the CIA’s inaccurate statements that KSM’s reporting “led” to the investigation of Iyman Faris were 
only made “[i]n a few cases,” and “[i]n a small number of... representations.” As described in the full Committee 
Study, the CIA repeatedly represented that KSM’s reporting “led” to the investigation of Iyman Faris, and was 
responsible for the “identification” and “capture” of Iyman Faris. 

1572 Information provided by the FBI to the Committee on November, 30, 2010. Records do not provide an 
explanation for the closing of the investigation. 

1573 WHDC 

1574 ALEC 



(102129Z MAR 03). See also ALEC 
(261725Z MAR 03) 



(180200Z MAR 03). 



1575 Information provided to the Committee by the FBI on November, 30, 2010. 



1576 



13658 (0503 18Z MAR 03). See the section on the capture of Majid Khan in this summary and in 




(060353Z MAR 03) 

(060353Z MAR 03) 

(060353Z MAR 03 ) 

158° pg| information relayed in ALEC m 

i58i pgj information confirmed for the Co mmittee on November, 30, 2010. 

T OP SECRET// 

Page 280 of 499 



Z /N OFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



While U.S. law enforcement investigations of Iyman Faris moved 
forward, Majid Khan, in foreign government custody, was being questioned by foreign 
government interrogators. According to CIA records, the interrogators were using rapport- 
building techniques, confronting Khan with inconsistencies in his story and obtaining 
information on Majid Khan’s al-Qa’ida connections. 1582 On March 11, 2003, Majid Khan 
identified a photo of Iyman Faris. 1583 Majid Khan stated that he knew Faris as “Abdul Raof,” 
and claimed Faris was a 35-year-old truck driver of Pakistani origin who was a “business partner 
of his father.” 1584 In addition to describing business deals Iyman Faris was involved in with 
Khan’s family, Majid Khan stated that Faris spoke Urdu and excellent English and had a 
“colorful personality.” 1585 The next day, while still in foreign government custody, Majid Khan 
stated that Iyman Faris was “an Islamic extremist.” 1586 According to CIA cables, on March 14, 
2003, Majid Khan provided “more damning information” on Iyman Faris, specifically that Faris 
was a “mujahudden during the Afghan/Soviet period” and was a close associate of his uncle, 
Maqsood Khan. Maqsood was a known al-Qa’ida associate whom Majid Khan had already 
admitted was in contact with senior al-Qa’ida members. Majid Khan told foreign government 
interrogators that it was Maqsood who provided the money for Majid Khan’s al-Qa’ida-related 
travels. 1587 Majid Khan further stated that “after the KSM arrest became public knowledge,” 
Iyman Faris contacted Majid Khan’s family and requested the family pass a message to Maqsood 
Khan regarding the status of KSM. 1588 This information on Iyman Faris was acquired prior to — 
and independently of — any reporting from the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 1589 

On March 10, 2003, in response to a requirements cable from CIA 
Headquarters reporting that al-Qa’ida was targeting U.S. suspension bridges, 1590 KSM stated that 
any such plans were “theoretical” and only “on paper.” He also stated that no one was currently 
pursuing such a plot. 1591 KSM repeated this assertion on March 16, 2003, 1592 noting that, while 
UBL officially endorsed attacks against suspension bridges in the United States, he “had no 
planned targets in the US which were pending attack and that after 9/11 the US had become too 
hard a target.” 1593 On neither occasion did KSM reference Iyman Faris. 




1582 



13678 (070724Z MAR 03). The cable states: “a [foreign government officer] talked quietly to 
[Majid Khan] alone for about ten minutes before the interview began and was able to establish an excellent level of 
rapport. The first hour and [a] half of the interview was a review of bio-data and information previously [reported]. 
When [foreign government interrogators] started putting pressure on [Majid Khan] by pulling apart his story about 
his ‘honeymoon’ in Bangkok and his attempt to rent an apartment, safehouse, for his cousin [Mansoor Maqsood, aka 
Iqbal, aka Talha, aka Moeen, aka Habib], at 1400, [Majid Khan] slumped in his chair and said he would reveal 
eve rything to of ficers. . . 

1583 ■■ 1 3758 FBI information later relayed in ALEC 

and inform ation provided to the Committee by the FBI on November, 30, 2010. See FBI case file | 

13758 
13758 
13765 

13785 ; HHI^H 13713 

13785 

1589 For ad ditional information, see intelligence chronology in Volume II. 

1590 ALEC^^B(071757ZMAR03) 

10752 (102320Z MAR 03); DIRECTOR (122101Z MAR 03). See also \ 

10858 (170747Z MAR 03) 

10858 (170747Z MAR 03) 

m i 1 1 i n i i mi him i 

Page 281 of 499 






UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



On March 15, 2003, deputy chief of ALEC Station, HHf 
who was n'.iduij 1 the intelligence from the foreign government interrogations of Majid 
Khan, requested a photograph of Majid Khan and additional information to use with KSM. 1594 
In response, CIA Headquarters sent the detention site photographs of Majid Khan’s family and 
associates, including Iyman Faris. 1595 

On March 17, 2003, eleven days after the FBI officially reopened 
its investigation of Iyman Faris, KSM was shown photographs of both Iyman Faris and Majid 
Khan. 1596 According to CIA cables, KSM was also asked detailed questions based on email 
communications, which a cable stated served as “an effective means to convey to [KSM] the 
impression that the USG already possessed considerable information and that the information 
would be used to check the accuracy of his statements.” 1597 In this context, KSM identified the 
photograph of Iyman Faris as a “truck driver” and a relative of Majid Khan. KSM claimed that 
he could not remember the truck driver’s name. KSM described the “truck driver” as a “colorful 
character who liked to drink and have girlfriends and was very interested in business.” 1598 The 
next day, March 18, 2003, KSM stated that in February 2002 he tasked the “truck driver” to 
procure specialized machine tools that would be useful to al-Qa’ida to loosen the nuts and bolts 
of suspension bridges in the United States. According to KSM, in March 2002, the “truck 
driver” asked Mansour Khan [son of Maqsood Khan] 1599 to inform KSM that he (the “truck 
driver”) could not find such tools. KSM stated that he made no further requests of the “truck 
driver.” 1600 



According to a CIA cable, on the evening of March 20, 2003, the 
FBI informed the CIA that “Ohio police had been following [Iyman] Faris for ‘some time,’ and 
had stopped him and questioned him about his relationship to Shoukat Ali Khan [Majid Khan’s 



1594 Memorandum for: 



|, [REDACTED]; from: [REDACTED],OFFICE: 



/'[DETENTION 



SITE BLUE]; subject: Baltimore boy and KSM; date: 15 March 2003, at 07:08:32 PM. 



1595 Email from: 



date: March 15, 2003, at 2:32 PM; ALEC 



|; to: [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Baltimore boy and KSM; 



(152212Z MAR 03). 



1596 



Having read reporting from the interrogations of Majid Khan, one of KSM’s debriefers at the CIA’s 



DETENTION SITE BLUE, deputy chief of A LEC Station, 
with Ksm [sic] et al.” (See Memorandum for 




requested the photographs to “use 
|, [REDACTED]; from [RED ACTED], OFFICE: 



^[DETENTION SITE BLUE]; subject: Baltimore boy and KSM; date: 15 March 2003, at 07:08:32 PM.) 



The photographs were sent to DETENTION SITE BLUE shortly thereafter. See ALEC | 
03). 




■ (152212Z MAR 
10866 (171 832Z MAR 



J0865 (171648Z MAR 03), disseminated as 
_10870 (172017Z MAR 03) 

10866 (171832Z MAR 03). KSM explained that Majid Khan was married to Maqsood Khan’s 
niece, and that “another Maqsood Khan relative was a truck driver in Ohio.” KSM stated that he had met him “on at 
least one occasion” at the home of Ma qsood Kh an in Karachi in approximatel y 1999 or 2000. Th is infonnation was 

(180200Z MAR 03). See also ■■■■■. 



also sent o n March 18, 2003, in ALEC 

1599 ALEC 

1600 




(261745Z MAR 03) 

10886 (182219Z MAR 03); ALEC 



(180200Z MAR 03). In assessing the session for CIA 



Headquarters, personnel at DETENTION SITE BLUE wrote that “KSM will selectively lie, provide partial truths, 
and misdirect when he believes he will not be found out and held accountable.” On the other hand, they wrote that 
“KSM appears more inclined to make accurate disclosures when he believes people, emails, or other source material 



are available to the USG for checking his r esponses.’ 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 282 of 499 




182140Z MAR 03). 

/ NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



/ /NOFORN 



father] of Baltimore.” 1601 According to a CIA officer, “[w]hen the FBI approached Faris he 
talked voluntarily.” 1602 Records indicate that Faris “initially claimed to know Shoukat Ali Khan 
though the gas station business” and agreed to take a polygraph examination. According to FBI 
records, prior to the polygraph, Faris admitted to being associated with KSM and provided 
details on his relationships with al-Qa’ida members in Pakistan. 1603 Specifically, Iyman Faris 
told FBI and Ohio police that he had met KSM twice and had been “tasked with procuring 
items.” Faris detailed how KSM had a plan “to cut the suspension cables on the Brooklyn 
Bridge to cause its collapse using gas cutters.” 1604 Faris maintained that he “thought that the task 
to take down the bridge was impossible” 1605 and did not take further action. 1606 



(242226Z MAR 03), which discusses information obtained by FBI officials on March 20, 



1601 See WHDC 
2003; and FBI case file 

1602 CIA Office of Inspector General interview of 
CTC, by 



I, Chief of the m Branch of the UBL Group at 



[, Office of the Inspector General, July 30, 2003. The interview report states: “CIA initiated 
tire lead (not from detainees) to an individual believed to live in Baltimore - Majid Khan. He was believed to be in 
contact with a nephew of [KSM]. The FBI initiated trash coverage (using their special authorities to tap e-mai l) on 
the Baltim ore residence w here Khan had lived and f amily members still lived. Meanwhile, using | 

FISA coverage the Agency, with tire help of [a foreign government], located 

[Majid] Khan. The Baltimore house placed a call to Ohio (to Iyman Faris) which became another FBI lead. When 
the FBI approached Faris he talked voluntarily.” 



1603 See FBI case file 



; WHDC 



(21 1522Z MAR 03) and WHDC 



(242226Z MAR 03). 



Faris described Maqsood Khan as “the ‘right foot’ of Usama bin Ladin (UBL).” 



1604 See WHDC 



(242226Z MAR 03); and WHDC 



(21 1522Z MAR 03) (discusses information obtained 



by FBI officials on March 20, 2003). 



1605 



ALEC 



(261745Z MAR 03). A senior CIA counterterrorism official, who had previously served as chief 
of the Bin Ladin Unit, commented on the intelligence obtained from Iyman Faris on the Brooklyn Bridge plotting, 
stating: “i guess we have to take these guys at their word, but if these are the types of attacks ksm was planning, 
[KSM] was more of a nuisnace [sic] than a threat and you have to wonder how he ever thought of anything as 
imaginative as the 1 1 sept attacks, i wonder if he had two tracks going: ops like 1 1 sept and a whole other series 
half-baked, secular palestinian-style ops like those majid khan, faris, and the other yahoos are talking about, perhaps 
he believe [sic] if we caught the yahoos, we would relax a bit and they would be better able to hit us with an 
effective attack? the other alternative, is that ksm hi mself is a^ahoo. strange stuff.” (See email from : 
to: 

subject: attacks in conus; date: March 25, 2003, at 6:19:18 AM, referencing cable WHDC 
03), with the subject line, “EYES ONLY: Majid Khan: Imminent al-Qa’ida Plots to Attack NYC and WDC Targets 
Aborted by KSM Capture.”) In a separate email, the senior official wrote: “again, odd. ksm wants to get ‘machine 
tools’ to loosen the bolts on bridges so they collapse? did he think no one would see or hear these yahoos trying to 
unscrew the bridge? that everyone would drive by and just ignore the effort to unbolt a roadway? and what about 
opsec: ‘yup, we were just goin g t o recruit a few of the neighbors to help knock down the brook l yn bri dge.’” See 

email from: 

|; date: March 25, 2003, at 6:35:18 AM. 

1606 ALEC (261745Z MAR 03). During this period, the CIA was receiving updates from the FBI debriefings 



[REDACTED]; 
(242226Z MAR 



of Iyman Faris. See TRRS-03-03-0610, referenced in 



10984 (24235 1Z MAR 03). On March 20, 2003, 



KSM confirmed that he had tasked “the truck driver... to procure machine tools that would be useful to al-Qa’ida in 
its plan to loosen the nuts and bolts of suspension bridges,” but stated he had “never divulged specific targeting 



10910 (2021 08Z MAR 03).) A CIA cable from March 24, 

^ readout on Majid Khan debriefs [who was 



information to the truck driver.” (See 

2003, noted that KSM’s CIA interrogators were “reviewing latest | 
in foreign government custody] and FBI [intelligence reports] from debriefings of the truck driver Faris Iyman 
[sic],” and that the CIA team was therefore “focused entirely on sorting out the information on Majid’s claim... as 



well as buck driver details on the threat.” (See 



10984 (242351Z MAR 03).) According to another cable, 



KSM indicated that while the original plan was to sever the cables, he determined that it would be easie^^cquire 

machine tools that would allow the operatives to “loosen the large nuts and bolts of the bridges.” (See 

10985 (24235 1Z MAR 03).) The disseminate^ntelligenc^epor^m^|)^I^ 1TO g at ^ on added that KSM stated his 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi mu i 

Page 283 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



Over several weeks Iyraan Faris continued to voluntarily cooperate 
with law enforcement officials and engaged in efforts to assist in the capture of Maqsood 
Khan. 1607 Faris provided additional details on his activities related to the Khan family, KSM, his 
meeting with UBL, and two extremists in the United States who had discussed wanting “to kill 
Americans in a Columbus area shopping mall with a Kalashnikov automatic rifle.” 1608 On April 
22, 2003, “Faris had accepted a plea agreement” 1609 and continued to cooperate, including by 
sending email messages to al-Qa’ida members in Pakistan for the purposes of intelligence 
collection. 1610 On May 1, 2003, Faris was transported from Quantico, Virginia, where he was 
voluntarily residing and working with the FBI, to a federal court in Alexandria, Virginia, where 
he pled guilty to material support to terrorism charges. 1611 He was subsequently sentenced to 20 
years in prison. 1612 

O n April 3, 2003, the Interagency Intelligence Committee on 
Terrorism (IICT) assessed that the use of tools to loosen the bolts of suspension bridges were 
“methods that appear to be unrealistic.” 1613 

6. The Identification, Capture, and Arrest of Sajid Badat 



Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and produced critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, which 
thwarted plots and saved lives. Over a period of years, the CIA provided the identification, 
discovery, capture, and arrest of Sajid Badat as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. These representations were inaccurate. U.K. domestic 
investigative efforts, reporting from foreign intelligence services, international law enforcement 
efforts, and U.S. military reporting resulted in the identification and arrest of Sajid Badat. 



last communication with Iyman Faris was shortly before his capture on March 1, 2003, and that he (KSM) was 
“severely disappointed to learnthatlyman had not yet been successful in his mission to purchase the necessary 
materials.” {See DIRECTOR (251 1 1Z MAR 03).) Later, on April 10, 2003, a CIA cable stated that KSM 

told CIA interrogators that al-Qa’ida members had “cased” the Brooklyn Bridge and that KS M had d iscussed 
attacking suspension bridges with other senior al-Qa’ida operatives. See HEADQUARTERS (100928Z APR 
03 ). 

1607 See FBI case tde ALEC (261725Z MAR 03), and Department of Justice release dated 

October 28, 2003, entitled, “Iyman Faris Sentenced for Providing Material Support to A1 Qaeda.” During these 
interviews Iyman Faris provided detailed information on a variety of matters, including his ongoing relationship 
with Maqsood Khan; the aliases he used in Pakistan (“Mohmed Rauf’ and “Gura”); how he became acquainted with 
KSM and al-Qa’ida; as well as his interaction with the Majid Khan family. Iyman Faris further provided 
information on his initial meeting with UBL and how he helped Maqsood Khan obtain supplies “for usage by 
Usama Bin Ladin” when he was in Pakistan. 

1608 ALEC^Hi (022304Z APR 03); ALEC BM(030128Z APR 03); ALEC i^*(022304Z APR 03); 
WHDC i^K0U857Z APR 03). See also ALECHHH (261725Z MAR 03); ALEc|jH (010200Z APR 
03); ALEcW/M (261933Z MAR 03). 

1609 WHDC ■BT(232240Z APR 03) 

1610 See Department of Justice comments in “The Triple Life of a Qaeda Man,” Time Magazine, June 22, 2003. 

See FBI case file IHHillHHHHii- 

1612 See Department of Justice release dated October 28, 2003, entitled, “Iyman Faris Sentenced for Providing 
Material Support to A1 Qaeda.” 

1613 “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT, 
April 3, 2003. 



TOP -S E G RET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 284 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



Further Details: Sajid Badat 1614 was selected by al-Qa’ida leaders, 
including Abu Hafs al-Masri and Sayf al-‘Adl, to cany out an attack against a Western airliner 
with Richard Reid using a shoe bomb explosive device in December 2001. 161 5 Sajid Badat 
returned to the United Kingdom in late 2001 and sent a message to his al-Qa’ida handler, Ammar 
al-Baluchi, stating that he was withdrawing from the operation. 1616 On December 22, 2001, 



1614 Note on CIA records related to U.K.-based “Issas”: Two United Kingdom-based al-Qa’ida associates, Dhiren 

Barot and Sajid Badat, were known by the same common aliases, Issa, Abu Issa, Abu Issa al-Britani (“[of] Britain”) 
and/or Issa al-Pakistani. Both individuals were British Indians who had been independently in contact with senior 
al-Qa’ida leaders in Pakistan. Reporting indicated that the Issas were located in the United Kingdom and engaged in 
terrorist targeting of the U.K. The investigation into their true identities was a U.K.-led operation. As a result, the 
CIA sometimes had limited insight into U.K.-based activities to identify and locate the Issas. Senior CIA personnel 
expressed frustration that the U.K. was not sharing all known information on its investigations, writing in August 
2003 that “[the FBI is] clearly working closely with the [U.K. service] on tiiese matters and [the CIA is] at the 
mercy” of what it is told. In June 2003, the CIA informed the FBI that the CIA had “no electronic record of 
receiving any transcripts or summaries from your agency’s interviews with [Richard] Reid, and would appreciate 
dissemination of summaries of questioning for the purposes of [CIA] analysis.” Until the arrest of one of the Issas, 
Sajid Badat, on November 27, 2003, the U.S. Intelligence Community and U.K. authorities often confused the two 
al-Qa’ida associates. As a result, the quality and clarity of detainee reporting on the Issas (including reporting from 
detainees in die custody of the CI A, U.S. military. Department of Justice, and foreign services) varied. CIA 
personnel reported in September 2003 that there were “two (or three) Abu Issas” in 

intelligence reporting and that because of their similarities, it was often “unclear which Issa die detainees [were] 
referring to at different stages.” Once detained in the United Kingdom in November 2003, Sajid Badat (one of the 
Issas) cooperated with U.K. authorities and provided information about die other “Issa.” Badat stated that “people 
often asked [Badat] about [the other] Issa, as they were both British Indians.” According to Sajid Badat, “anyone 
who had been involved widi jihad in Britain since the mid-90s” would know Issa al-Hindi (aka Dhiren Barot), to 
include Babar Ahmed, Moazzem Begg, Richard Reid, Zacarias Moussaoui, and KSM. The other Issa, Dhiren Barot, 
arrested on August 3, 2004, was found to have been especially well-known among the U.K.-based extremist 
community, having written a popular book in 1999 expounding the virtues of jihad in Kashmir under the alias, “Esa 
al-Hindi.” CIA records include a reference to the book and a description of its author (“a brother from England who 
was a Hindu and became a Muslim... [whojgottraininginAfghanistam December 1999 

(disseminated by the CIA on 12/31/99 in The [foreign partner] would later 

report that Dhiren Barot “frequently” appeared “in reporting of terrorist training” and had “involvement in Jihad in 
occupied Kashmir, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Malaysia, throughout the 1990s.” The Committee Study is based on 
more than six million pages of material related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program provided by the 
CIA. Access was not provided to intelligence databases of the CIA or any other U.S. or foreign intelligence or law 
enforcement agency. Insomuch as intelligence from these sources is included, it was, unless noted otherwise, found 
within the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program material produced for this Study. It is likely that significant 
intelligence unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program on Sajid Badat and Dhiren Barot exists in 
U.S. in telligenc e and law enforcem ent records and databases. See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including: 
ALEC ■■■ (112157Z JUN 03); ■■ 19907 (231744Z APR 0 4); 99093 (020931Z SEP 03); 

ALEC ^^^212117ZAUG 03LCIAWASHINGTON DC (162127Z JUN 03); and a series of emails 

between^^B||||||HIH and (with multiple cc s) on Augu st 22, 2003, at 9:24:43 AM. 

1615 Am ong other documents, see^^^^^J97^U25^322y(UNK)2)^HHH^2£2^2? ^ 1 ^Z. AUG 02); CIA 

■H (311736Z OCT 02), ■H||HHII^^Hi^HH^H^nd|^^H 99093 SEP 

03). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “KSM’s reporting also clearly distinguished between, and thereby 
focused investigations of, two al-Qa’ida operatives known as Issa al-Britani.” As detailed in the KSM detainee 
review in Volume III, KSM did discuss the two operatives, but he did not identify either by name (or, in the case of 
Dhiren Barot, by his more common kimya, Issa al-Hindi), and provided no actionable intelligence that contributed to 
the eventual identification of, or locational information for, either individual. 

16,6 Among other documents, see CIA Headquarters document, entitled, “OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS 
AGAINST GLOBAL SUNNI EXTREMIST TERRORISM,” dated, “14 January 2002 1630 Hours”; CIA 
Headquarters document, entitled, “OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS AGAINST GLOBAL SUNNI 



Page 285 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Richard Reid attempted to detonate a shoe bomb on a flight from Paris, France, to Miami, 
Florida. The plane was diverted to Boston, Massachusetts, and Reid was taken into custody. 1617 

The discovery, identification, capture, and arrest of Sajid Badat, 
the shoe bomber, is one of the eight most frequently cited examples provided by the CIA as 
evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Over a period of 
years, CIA documents prepared for and provided to senior policymakers, intelligence officials, 
and the Department of Justice represent the discovery, identification, capture, and/or arrest of 
Sajid Badat as an example of how “[kjey intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after 
applying interrogation techniques” had “enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots” and “capture 
additional terrorists.” 1618 In at least one CIA document prepared for the president, the CIA 
specifically highlighted the waterboard interrogation technique in enabling the CIA to learn “that 
Sajid Badat was the operative slated to launch a simultaneous shoe bomb attack with Richard 
Reid in 200 1.” 1619 The CIA further represented that the intelligence acquired from the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques was “otherwise unavailable” and “saved lives.” 1620 



EXTREMIST TERRORISM ,” dated. “22 January 2002 1 fS^O Hom e”- a i nr 
13120 ! 



(142334Z MAY 03); and 



See intelligence chronology in Volume II and multiple open source reports, as well as Department of Justice 
materials, including United States v. Richard Reid Indictment, U.S. District Court, District of Massachusetts, 

January 16, 2002. According to a CIA operational update, in early December 2001, a unilateral CIA source reported 
that a known extremist indicated there would be an attack on either an American or British airliner, originating in 
France, Germany, or Britain, with the use of explosives concealed in shoes.” According to CIA records, an 
unclassified notice distributed to airlines concerning information from the CIA source in early December 2001 “is 
credited with having alerted flight crew personnel and their having reacted so swiftly to Reid’s actions” aboard 
Flight 63. See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including CIA Headquarters document, entitled 
“OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS AGAINST GLOBAL SUNNI EXTREMIST TERRORISM ’’ dated “9 April 
2002 1630 Hours.” ’ ’ F 

8 Italics included in CIA Memorandum to the Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” from March 2, 2005. 

See document entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 2007, with 
the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 

16 0 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see : 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30 2005 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the’use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 

“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States. {See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA-provided infor mation), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program— 

in — mm 

Page 286 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET // 



// NOFOR N 



As an exam P le ’ on October 26, 2007, the CIA faxed a document to 
the Senate Appropriations Committee appealing a proposed elimination of funding for the CIA’s 
Rendition and Detention Program. The CIA appeal states that “[m]ost, if not all, of the 
intelligence acquired from high-value detainees in this program would likely not have been 
discovered or reported in any other way.” Representing the success of the CIA interrogation 
program, the document states: 

“Detainees have. . . permitted discovery of terrorist cells, key individuals 
and the interdiction of numerous plots, including... the discovery of an 



and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the Ptesident 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.”’ (See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 
al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[germination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” (See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” (See Memorandum for: Inspector Genetal; from. James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or repoited by other 
means.” (See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB 2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM), 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references, to include Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, 
which provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailabhnntelligenc^haC|save^ 

TOP SECRET 

Page 287 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



operative who was preparing another attack 1621 like that attempted by 
‘shoe bomber’ Richard Reid.” 1622 

Similarly, in early March 2005, the CIA compiled talking points on 
the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques for use in a meeting with the 
National Security Council. The document states, “[t]he Central Intelligence Agency can advise 
you that this program works and the techniques are effective in producing foreign intelligence.” 
The document states that “ after applying interrogation techniques,” the CIA “learned from KSM 
and Ammar that Sajid Badat was the operative slated to launch a simultaneous shoe bomb attack 
with Richard Reid in December 2001. ” 1623 A month later, on April 15, 2005, the CIA faxed an 
eight-page document to the Department of Justice’s Office of Legal Counsel entitled, “Briefing 
Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” which contained similar information. 1624 The Office 
of Legal Counsel used the information to support its May 30, 2005, legal opinion on whether 
certain “enhanced interrogation techniques” were consistent with United States obligations under 
Article 16 of the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhumane or 
Degrading Treatment or Punishment. 1625 The CIA-provided document states: 

“Identifying the ‘other’ shoe bomber. Leads provided by KSM in November 
2003 led directly to the arrest of shoe bomber Richard Reid’s one-time partner 
Sajid Badat in the UK. KSM had volunteered the existence of Badat — whom 



1621 As detailed in the intelligence chronology in Volume H, there is no evidence to support the CIA assertion in 
October 2007 that Sajid Badat was “preparing another attack like that attempted by ‘shoe bomber’ Richard Reid.” A 
body of intelligence collected after the December 22, 2001, attempted shoe bomb attack by Richard Reid indicated 
that the proposed partner “backed out of the operation.” This information was corroborated by signals intelligence. 
Once detained on November 27, 2003, Sajid Badat cooperated with U.K. authorities and described how he withdrew 
from the operation. See , among other CIA records, CIA Headquarters document, entitled, “OPERATIONAL 



DEVELOPMENTS AGAINST GLOBAL SUNNI EXTREMIST TERRORISM,” dated “14 January 2002 1630 
Hours.” 

1622 Italics added. CIA fax from CIA employee [REDACTED] to U.S. Senate Committee on Appropriations, 
Subcommittee on Defense, with fax cover sheet entitled, “Talk ing points,” sent on October 26, 2007, at 5:39:48 PM; 
document faxed entitled, “Talking Points Appeal of the $m Million reduction in CIA/CTC’s Rendition and 
Detention Program.” As detailed in the intelligence chronology in Volume II, there is no evidence that Sajid Badat 
was “preparing another attack like that attempted by ‘shoe bomber’ Richard Reid.” All intelligence collected after 
the December 22, 2001, attempted shoe bomb attack by Richard Reid indicated that his proposed partner “backed 
out of the operation.” See, for example, CIA Headquarters document, entitled, “OPERATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENTS AGAINST GLOBAL SUNNI EXTREMIST TERRORISM,” dated, “14 January 2002 1630 



Hours.” 

1623 Italics in original. CIA Talking Points entitled, “Talking Points for 10 March 2005 DCI Meeting PC: 
Effectiveness of the High-Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques.” 

1624 CIA “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” faxed from the CIA to the Department of Justice on 
April 15, 2005, at 10:47AM. See also a CIA document dated December 20, 2005, and entitled, “Examples of 
Detainee Reporting Used by Our CT Partners to Thwart Terrorists, 2003-2005,” which includes four columns: 
“Detainees,” “What They Told Us,” “Actions Taken By Our CT Partners,” and “Results.” Under the heading of 
KSM and Ammar al-Baluchi, the document states: “What They Told Us. . .” “Provided lead information to Issa al- 
Britani, a.k.a. Sajid Badat in the United Kingdom, November 2003. KSM said Badat was an operative slated to 
launch a shoe-bomb attack simultaneously with Richard Reid in December 2001. Ammar al-Baluchi provided 
additional information on Badat... Results. ..Disrupted a shoe-bomb attack.” 

1625 p or a ddjti ona i information, see Volum e I and Volume II. 

lor n if r him 



Page 288 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SE C RET^ 



/ /NOFORN 



he knew as ‘Issa al-Pakistani’ 1626 — as the operative who was slated to launch a 
simultaneous shoe bomb attack with Richard Reid in December 2001. ” 1627 

lar inaccurate representations regarding the 
the discovery, identification, capture, and 
arrest of Sajid Badat in 16 of the 20 documents provided to policymakers and the Department of 
Justice between July 2003 and March 2009. 1629 However, in an additional case, a March 4, 
2005, CIA briefing for Vice President Cheney, the CIA credited Abu Zubaydah with identifying 
Sajid Badat, 1630 despite a lack of any reporting on Sajid Badat from Abu Zubaydah. 1631 



The CIA provided sim 
purported role of KSM and Ammar al-Baluchi 1628 in 



1626 There are no records of KSM identifying Sajid Badat as “lssa al-Pakistani.” CIA records indicate that KSM 
stated he did not know Richard Reid’s partner's true name, but referred to him only as “Abu lssa al-Britani” 
(described in CIA cables as “Abu Iss a the Britain” [sic]), or as “Issa Richard." See intelligence chronology in 
Volume II, including ALEC m (1 12157Z JUN 03). 

1627 CIA “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” faxed from the CIA to the Department of Justice on 
April 15, 2005, at 10:47AM. As detailed in Volume II, there are no CIA records of KSM providing any reporting in 
November 2003 contributing to Sajid Badat’s arrest. 

1628 CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team- “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations (RDI) ,” including 
“Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009”: “...[LJeads provided by KSM and Ammar 
al-Baluchi in November 2003 led directly to the arrest in the United Kingdom of Sajid Badat the operative who was 
slated to launch a simultaneous shoe-bomb attack with Richard Reid in December 2001.” Ammar al-Baluchi, while 
still in foreign government custody, and prior to being transferred to CIA custody and subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, stated that he had contacted “Abu Issa” on behalf of KSM, but the CIA believed 



that Ammar al-Baluchi was providing inaccurate information. ( See ALEC 20623^ 

[foreign partner] authorities later indicated that they believed that Ammar al-Baluchi was providing accurate 



reporting on Abu Issa. ( See \ 



10054 



Later, in CIA custody, Ammar al-Baluchi 



described Issa’s connection to the Richard Reid plot. The CIA credited confronting Ammar al-Baluchi with emails 



as “key in gaining Ammar’s admissions.” ( See ALEC | 



I.) As detailed in Volume II, 



Ammar al-Baluchi, like KSM, was unable, or unwilling, to identify Sajid Badat by name. 

1629 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 
Volume II. 

1630 CIA briefing for Vice President Cheney, dated March 4, 2005, entitled, “Briefing for Vice President Cheney: 
CIA Detention and Interrogation Program.” The briefing document states: “Shoe Bomber: Sajid Badat, an 
operative slated to launch a simultaneous shoe bomb attack with Richard Reid in December 2001, identified and 
captured. Source: Abu Zubaydah.” There are no CIA records to support this statement. On August 17, 2003, Abu 
Zubaydah was shown a picture of Sajid Badat that a CIA officer stated “looks an awful lot like the sketches” from a 
detainee in foreign government custody. Abu Zubaydah stated he did not recognize the person in the photo. On 
August 22, 2003, sketches of Badat were shown to Abu Zubaydah, who did not recognize the individual depicted. 




(multiple ccs ); subject: “Re: Meeting with | 

12713 (231932Z AUG 03). 



See email from: 

date: August 17, 2003, at 1:04 PM; H|^BTl2679 (181124Z AUG 03); | 

1631 The CIA also credited Abu Zubaydah, who was captured in March 2002, with identifying Richard Reid, who 
was arrested in December 2001. This inaccurate information was presented to select National Security Council 
principals, Secretary of State Powell and Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld, and Assistant Attorney General Jack 
Goldsmith. See CIA briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program, ” dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior 
White House officials (Memorandum for the Record; subject: CIA Interrogation Program; September 27, 2003 
(OGC-FO-2003-50088); Slides, CIA Interrogation Program, 16 September 2003). The Memorandum for the Record 
drafted by John Bellinger refers to a “detailed handout” provided by the CIA. See John B. Bellinger III, Senior 
Associate Counsel to the President and Legal Advisor, National Security Council; Memorandum for the Record; 
subject: Briefing of Secretaries Powell and Rumsfeld regarding Interrogation of High-Value Detainees; date: 
September 30, 2003. See also Scott W. Muller; Memorandum for the Record; Interrogation briefing for Jack 
Goldsmith; date: 16 October 2003 (OGC-FO-2003-50097). 

III! I I III I III! i mi I 

Page 289 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



Contrary to CIA representations, a review of CIA operational 
cables and other documents found that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques did not 
result in otherwise unavailable intelligence leading to the discovery, identification, capture, or 
arrest of Sajid Badat. According to CIA records and the U.K.’s own investigative summary, 1632 
the investigation of Sajid Badat was a United Kingdom-led operation, and the intelligence that 
alerted security officials to: (1) a U.K.-based “Issa” (aka, Sajid Badat); (2) a potential second 
“shoe bomber” related to Richard Reid; 1633 (3) a suspected U.K. terrorist named “Sajid 
Badat”; 1634 (4) Sajid Badat’ s connection to Richard Reid; (5) Sajid Badat’ s physical description; 
(6) Sajid Badat’ s location; and (7) the initial identification of a U.K. surveillance photo of Sajid 
Badat, the “shoe bomber,” 1635 was unrelated to information acquired from CIA detainees during 
or after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA records indicate that the 
information that led to Sajid Badat’ s arrest and U.K. criminal prosecution was also not derived 
from the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 1636 



Prior to any reporting from CIA detainees, and as early as January 
14, 2002, the FBI informed the CIA that Richard Reid “had an unidentified partner who 
allegedly backed out of the operation at the last minute.” 1637 This information was later 



1632 13165 

1633 The CIA’s June 2013 Response maintains that “KSM was the first to tell [the CIA] there was a second shoe 

bomber and that he remained at large.” The Committee found this statement to be incongruent with CIA records. 
There were multiple reports that Richard Reid had an unidentified partner prior to the provision of any information 
from KSM (captured on March 1, 2003). The CIA’s June 2013 Response addresses only one of two documented 
efforts by the FBI in January 2002 to inform the CIA that Richard Reid had “an unidentified partner who allegedly 
backed out of the operation at the last minute.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that this FBI 
information was provided to senior CIA leadership in writing, but states that, on one of the two days the information 
was provided, “the Reid investigation came on page 10 of 15 pages of updates that day,” and that the information 
did not “exist in any searchable CIA data repositories.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response also does not address the 
CIA’s own source reporting on “another operative” who existed alongside Richard Reid. In April 2002, a reliable 
CIA source — who had warned of the Richard Reid shoe-bomb attack weeks before it occurred — reported that, in 
addition to Richard Reid, “another operative existed.” The source stated that, instead of an airliner departing from 
Paris, as had Richard Reid’s flight, “this attack would occur against an airliner originating from Heathrow 
International Airport in London.” Once captured, Sajid Badat would confirm this reporting. Despite acknowledging 
evidence to the contrary, and without further explanation, the CIA stated in meetings with the Committee in 2013 
that the CIA stands by its representations that “KSM was the first to tell [the CIA] there was a second shoe bomber 
and that he remained at large.” 

1634 See Volume II, including FBI WASHINGTON DC (160429Z JUL 02). The CIA’s June 2013 

Response acknowledges that there was intelligence reporting that Sajid Badat was involved in terrorist activities and 
“targeting American interests,” but defends its past assertions highlighting the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
inteirogation techniques in obtaining otherwise unavailable intelligence by asserting that, at the time of this 
reporting, there “was nothing at the time on Badat to lead [the CIA] to prioritize him over others.” 

1635 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “KSM was the first person to provide — in March 2003, after having 
undergone enhanced inteirogation techniques in CIA custody — a detailed and authoritative narrative of al-Qa’ida 
development of and plans to use shoe bombs operationally.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response does not acknowledge 
intelligence acquired by the Intelligence Community on these matters prior to any reporting from KSM and does not 
address the significant amount of fabricated reporting KSM provided. See Volume II for additional information. 

1636 See Volume II for additional information. 

1637 The FBI information was provided to the CIA. See CIA Headquarters document, entitled, “OPERATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENTS AGAINST GLOBAL SUNNI EXTREMIST TERRORISM,” dated, “14 January 2002 1630 
Hours.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges the existence of this CIA document and that the information 
in the document was “compiled... for counterterrorism seniors at CIA.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response nonetheless 
states that “[tjhere is no reference to this p ossibility [of a possible seco nd operat ive] in official communications 

ini' hi i in 

Page 290 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



T O P -S ECRET// 



// NOFOR N 



corroborated by a credible CIA source prior to any reporting from the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. 1638 In July 2002, a foreign government reported that pre-paid phone 
cards recovered by the FBI from Richard Reid upon his arrest were used by an individual named 
Sajid Badat to call a known terrorist, Nizar Trabelsi. 1639 FBI interviews of Trabelsi — officially 
relayed to the CIA in July 2002 — reported that “L. Badad Sajid” was “involved in operations 
targeting American interests.” 1640 The CIA highlighted in a July 2002 cable that this information 
matched previous reporting from a European government that identified a “Saajid Badat,” of 
Gloucester, United Kingdom, with a date of birth of March 28, 1979, as a person suspected of 
being involved in terrorist activity. 1641 Additional analysis of the phone card connecting Badat 
and Reid — as well as other intelligence — placed Sajid Badat and Richard Reid together in 
Belgium in September 2001. 1642 

(TS//^^HB^NF) According to Sajid Badat was linked to other 

well-known extremists in the Uni ted Kingdom who we re already under investigation. 
Specifically, Badat was known to as “a member of Babar Ahmad’s group,” 

and was a “particularly close associate of Mirza Beg.” reporting also determined that Badat 
had attended a jihad training camp in Afghanistan.” 1643 

(TS//^HBHB/NF) Concurrent with the emergence of information linking Sajid Badat 
to Richard Reid, there was an ongoing international effort to identify one or more U.K.-based al- 
Qa’ida operatives known as “Issa.” 1644 As early as June 2002, CIA records indicate that an 



between FBI and CIA, nor did it exist in any searchable CIA data repositories prior to KSM’s reporting.” The CIA 
expressed concern that the FBI was not sharing information from the debriefings of Richard Reid. Additional FBI 
information about Sajid Badat, including a ny inform ation obtained from Richard Reid, was not available to the 
Committee. See CIA WASHINGTON DC ■■ (162127Z JUN 03). 

1638 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including U.S. military detainee reporting detailed in CIA 
Headquarters document, entitled, “OPERATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS AGAINST GLOBAL SUNNI 
EXTREMIST TERRORISM,” dated, “9 April 2002 1630 Hours.” This CIA document included reporting from a 
CIA source who stated that, in addition to Richard Reid, “another operative existed” who was planning an attack 
“against an airliner originating from Heathrow International Airport in London.” The same source had provided 
reporting on an “attack. . . against an airliner originating in France, Germany, or Britain, with the use of explosi ves 
concealed in shoes” just prior to Richard Reid’s attempted use of explosives concealed in shoes on December 21, 
2001. Despite corroborated intelligence reporting acquired prior to the provision of information from CIA 
detainees, the CIA represented, as late as October 2007, that “[m]ost, if not all, of the intelligence acquired from 
high-value detainees in [the CIA] program would likely not have been discovered or reported in any other way,” 
crediting CIA detainees with “the discovery of an operative who was preparing another attack like that attempted by 
‘shoe bomber’ Richard Reid.” See CIA fax from CIA employee [REDACTED] to U.S. Senate Committee on 
Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense, with fax cover sheet entitled, “Talkingpoints,” sent on October 26, 
2007, at 5:39:48 PM. Document faxed entitled, “Talking Points Appeal of the Million reduction in 
ClA/CTC’s Rendition and Detention Program.” 

1639 FBI WASHINGTON DC (130706Z JUL 02) 

1640 FBI WASHI NGTON DC (160429Z JUL 02) 

1641 CIA IHIHi^HjHRECTOR | 

1642 FBI WASHINGTONDC^^M (130706Z JUL 02); FBI WASHINGTON | 

13 165 

1643 &tt^^H[foreien partner] summary of the Sajid Badat investigation and | 

1644 [foreign partner] authorities relayed to the CIA that there were “two (or three) Abu Issas” in 
terrorist threat reporting who were descri bed as from tire U.K. and engaged in suspected al-Qa’ida terrorist 
operations. CIA Headquarters informed ^^^HHhnAugust2003that^there are (at least) two/two important 

TOP^EGRET^I^BM— //NOFORN 

Page 291 of 499 




(2903 15Z AUG 02); 



13165 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRET// 



/ 7NOF O R N 



individual in the custody of a foreign government, Abu Zubair al-Ha’ili, repeatedly referenced an 
“Abu Issa al-Pakistani” as a British-born Pakistani associated with Richard Reid and engaged in 
plotting in the United Kingdom at the behest of KSM. 1645 This information was corroborative of 
other intelligence reporting. 1646 In May 2003, this detainee met with CIA officers to produce 
several sketches that were described as having “achieved a 95% likeness” of this indiv idual. 1647 
Oi^ugust 17, 2003, CIA officers noted that a photograph of Sajid Badat provided by HHHH 
ml t a foreign partner] looked “an awful lot like the sketches” of the Richard Reid 
associate made with the assistance of the detainee in foreign government custody. 1648 



c ) CIA Headquarters requested that the photograph be shown to CIA 
detainees. According to CIA records, on August 18, 2003, “KSM viewed the picture for a while, 
but said he did not recognize the person in the photo.” When KSM was asked if Issa’s name 
could be Sajid Badat, “KSM shrugged and said that the Badat name was not the name he 
recalled.” Pressed further, KSM stated, “he was confident that the name Sajid Badat was not 
Issa’s name.” 1649 On August 22, 2003, emails among CIA officers stated that “CTC believes that 
Abu Issa’s true name is Sajid Badat. . . KSM says that Badat is not Abu Issa — but he might be 
lying.” 1650 On August 23, 2003, the detailed sketches derived from interviews of the detainee in 



fugitives known as Issa and carrying UK passports (those both are known at times as Issa al-Britani), and both have 
strong links to KSM.” See intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional details. 



1645 Amo ng oth er documents, see 
19780 



19744 




investigation 



1647 




197121 

See also April 4, 2003, cable from the CIA | 
providing information on a U.K. “Issa” in which the CIA acknowledges | 
already underway, writing “we realize that Abu Issa is [a subject of interest] of interest [your government].” Abu 
Zubair al-Ha’ili is also known by the variant, Abu Zubayr al-Ha’ili. Abu Zubair al-Ha’ili was never in CIA custody. 
1646 See intel ligence chronolog y in Volume II. 

24237 _ 

(multiple ccs); subject: “Re: Meeting with | 



1648 Email from: 

date: August 17, 2003, at 1:04 PM. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[t]he fact that the [foreign partner] 
as late as August 2003 was only able to locate a poor quality photo of Sajid Badat belies the notion that Badat was 
well on his way to being identified as important and disrupted in advance of KSM’s reporting. However, the 
Committeefound when CIA officers received what they described as a “crummy” photo of Sajid Badat from the 

they nonetheless wrote, “it sure looks to me like Sajid is the shoe bomber Issa,” noting the body of 
intelligence compiled to date and the fact that “the photo [of Sajid Badat] looks an awful lot like the sketches of 
‘Issa al-Britani/Pakistani’” the CIA had obtained from the detainee in foreign government custody, Abu Zubair al- 
Ha’ili. Of note to CIA officers was that al-Ha’ili “was asked, ‘what is Abu Issa’s most striking feature or 
features?”’ Abu Zubair replied, “his eyes, thick frame eye glasses, and Pakistani hat.” Abu Zubair stated that Issa 
always wore a unique, irregularly shaped checkered hat that has the front center cut out of it and is only worn in 
Pakistan. In a discussion of the photo of Sajid Badat, a CIA offi cer wrote: “Sajid ap pears to have the same goofy 
hat on that Zubair went to lengths to describe.” See email from: 

ccs); subject: “Re: photo of Sajid badat, suspected as iden with Issa al-Hindi: some possible confusion”; date: 

Au gust 15, 20 03, at 7:20:40 PM. 

1649 HHH 



12679 (181 124Z AUG 03). Khallad bin Attash and Abu Zubaydah were also shown the picture of 
Sajid Badat. Both detainees stated they did not recognize the person in the photo. 



1650 



Series of emails, including email from: 



(multiple ccs); August 22, 



2003, at 9:24:43 AM. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states, “no one had suggested Badat could be a candidate for 
this Issa until KSM’s reporting.” CIA records indicate that KSM never identified Sajid Badat by name. Moreover, 
on March 20, 2003, while being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, KSM inaccurately 



identified Richard Reid’s U.K. associate as “Talha.” ( See 



10912 (2021 10Z MAR 03), disseminated as 



On May 11, 2003, a month and a half after the CIA ceased using its enhanced interrogation 
techniques against KSM, KSM stated that Talha was actually “Issa,” and that he had provided the name Talha under 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi i mi i 

Page 292 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



foreig n custody, Abu Zubair al-Ha’ili — the sketches CIA officers stated so closely resembled the 
HI [foreign partner] -provided photos of Sajid Badat — were shown to KSM. KSM stated he 
did not recognize the individual in the sketches. 1651 

Meanwhile, on August 21, 2003, a CIA cable noted that the HNI 
[foreign partner] had informed the CIA that joint interviews by the FBI and H [foreign 
partner] authorities of an individual in FBI custody, James Ujaama, led investigators in the U.K. 
to a home “formerly occupied by both Mirza [Beg] and Sajid [Badat].” 1652 The |m [foreign 
partner] authorities relayed to the CIA that “at least one of these men was known by the alias 
Issa,” and that the s ubject s were related to a separate ongoing terrorism investigation. 1653 On 
September 2, 2003, [foreign partner] authorities informed the CIA that “secret and 
reliable” reportin g indi cated that Sajid Badat is theRicharclReid associate and shoe bomber. 
According to the [foreignpartncrjreport, [foreign partner information] 

linked Badat to a larger^H|HHI network in the United Kingdom, which was part of the 
larger aforementioned |^H[foreign partner] investigation. 1654 

On September 9, 2003, a detainee in U.S. military custody at 
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, identified a photograph of Sajid Badat to a visiting U.K. official as Abu 
Issa the “shoe bomber.” 1655 The next day, KSM identified a photograph of Sajid Badat as “Issa 
al-Britani, aka Issa Richard” — the associate of Richard Reid. Other detainees in U.S. military 
custody subsequently identified the same photograph of Sajid Badat as “Abu Issa” the 
“shoebomber.” 1656 



•ressure and had now remembered die right name - Issa - after he had time to think about the question. See 

| (121729Z MAY 03). 




11584 (1 1 1753Z MAY 03); DIRECTOR ■ 

[12713 (231932Z AUG 03) 

1652 Ujaama had pled guilty to terrorism-related charges on April 14, 2003, and had agreed to continue cooperating 
with FBI officials on terrorism investigations. Earnest James Ujaama entered a guilty plea to a charge of conspiracy 
to provide goods and services to the Taliban on April 14, 2003. See U.S. Department of Justice press release dated 
April 14, 2003, and entitled, “Earnest James Ujaama Pleads Guilty to Conspiracy to Supply Goods and Services to 
the Taliban, Agrees to Cooperate with Terrorism Investigations.” 



1653 



ALEC 



|(21 21 17Z AUG 03). CIA records state that sometime prior to August 21, 2003, the FBI had 



entered Sajid Badat, with the correct identifying information, into | 




databases. 



[REDACTED], See also CIA 



|SEP 03)^ 

DEC 03), which includes a “Comment” that “during a 9 September 2003 interview of [Feroze Ali] Abassi at 
Guantanamo Bay, Abbasi identified Badat as a participant in the ‘information gathering course’ at al-Faruq” terrorist 
training camp, about which Abassi had previously provided detailed information. 



1656 



See 



12806 (101910Z SEP 03) and 



54986 (300927Z OCT 03). The CIA’s June 2013 



Response acknowledges that a U.S. military detainee first identified Sajid Badat, but argues that CIA representations 
on the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in producing otherwise unavailable intelligence 
in this case were nonetheless accurate. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that KSM “did provide unique 
intelligence,” and that “KSM’s identification of Badat [in the H photo] was more important than others who also 
recognized the photograph — including one who identified the photo a day before KSM did — because only KSM at 
the time had characterized this Issa as a partner to Reid and as a would-be shoe bomber.” As detailed in this 
summary and in greater detail in Volume II, the CIA’s 2013 Response is incongruent with interna^I^ecords^^ 
After the arrest of S ajid Badat, U.K. authorities described their investigati on of Sajid B adatB^B^HBBW8MMBI 

[specific U.K. intelligence 



The United Kingdom highlighted information from a 
collection on Sajid Badat] not further identified in CIA records. The U.K. record of investigation makes no 
reference to KSM’s photo identification, but rather states: “reporting on 9 September 2003 confirmed that a U.S. 
military detainee had positively identified Saaii^Bada^^binssa^V^sses^hat Sajid Badat is identical with both 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi m u i 

Page 293 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQFORN 



(TS/^BH^^HHV^^) After conducting extensive surveillance of Sajid Badat, U.K. 
authorities arrested Badat on November 27, 2003. 1657 Badat immediately cooperated with U.K. 
investigators and confirmed he withdrew from a shoe bomb operation with Richard Reid in 
December 2001. 1658 On November 28, 2003, the United Kingdom provided a detailed account to 
the CIA on how investigative efforts in the United Kingdom led to the identification of Sajid 
Badat, noting that “key aspects’’ of reportin^aequire^romCIA^.S. military, and foreign 
government detainees matched t hose of a [specific U.K. intelligence 

collection on Sajid Badat]. The “^H^|^|[^^^^f^[specific U.K. intelligence collection 
on Sajid Badat] was not previously referenced in U.K. investigative updates to the CIA. 1659 

(TS//^^^HH//NE) After pleading guilty in a U.K. court on Febr uary 28, 2005, to 
terro rism-related charges, Sajid Badat was sentenced to 13 years in prison. HBBHHHB 
d Sajid “Badat was voluntarily cooperative throughout much of his pre-sentencing 
incarceration.” 1660 On November 13, 2009, Sajid Badat’s 13-year prison sentence was reduced 
to 1 1 years. In March 2010, approximately five years after his sentencing, Sajid Badat was 
released under an agreement whereby Badat became a cooperating witness for U.S. and U.K. 
authorities. 1661 The legal agreement came to light when Sajid Badat testified against Adis 
Medunjanin, a U.S. terrorism suspect on trial in New York, via a video-link from the United 
Kingdom in April 2012. 1662 

7. The Thwarting of the Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf Plotting 



Sajid and Abu Issa the shoebomber.” See 



03)| 
Volume II. 

1657 ALEC 

1658 

1659 



I; [REDACTED]; CIA 



IO V 03); DIRECTOR 
>EC 03). See also the intelligence chronology in 




13120 



OV 03). The 



| [foreign partner] report highlights how the “[a named foreign 
government] reported that on the 13 September 2001 Nizar [Trabelsi] was arrested for his alleged involvement in 
planning a terrorist attack against the American Embassy in Paris” and how Trabelsi was connected to a phone card 
‘‘recovered from Richard Colvin Reid” but found to have been used by Sajid Badat. The report references a larger 
U.K. investigation, stating that Badat was found to be “a member of Babar Ahmad’s group” and to have “attended a 
jihad training camp in Afghanistan.” The H [foreign partner] report closes by stating: “Further reporting on 9 
September 2003 confirmed that a U.S. military detainee had positively identified Saajid Badat as Abu Issa. We 
assess that Sajid Badat is identical with both Sajid and Abu Issa the shoebomber.” 

1660 Email from: 



■HH: to: [REDACTED], with multiple ccs; subject: “Re: Profile on Saajid Badat for 
coord by 6pm, 19 October 2005; date: October 19, 2005, at 3:14:29 PM. 

1661 See open source reporting, including “Secret Life of Shoe Bomb Saajid Badat Funded By The Taxpayer,” U.K. 
Telegraph, dated April 23, 2012; “US court hears Bin Ladin testimony from UK bomb plotter,” BBC News, dated 
April 24, 2012; “Operative Details A1 Qaeda Plans to Hit Planes in Wake of 9/11,” CNN, dated April 25, 2012; and 
“‘Convention’ of Convicted Terrorists at NY Trial,” NPR News, dated April 24, 2012. 

1662 See open source reporting, including “Secret Life of Shoe Bomb Saajid Badat Funded By The Taxpayer,” U.K. 
Telegraph, dated April 23, 2012; “US court hears Bin Ladin testimony from UK bomb plotter,” BBC News, dated 
April 24, 2012; “Operative Details A1 Qaeda Plans to Hit Planes in Wake of 9/11,” CNN, dated April 25, 2012; 
“‘Convention’ of Convicted Terrorists at NY Trial,” NPR News, dated April 24, 2012; and “Man Convicted of a 
Terrorist Plot to Bomb Subways Is Sent to Prison for Life,” New York Times, da ted November 16, 2012. 

ini '.I i in i ' hi in 



Page 294 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 




Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and produced critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, which 
thwarted plots and saved lives. Over a period of years, the CIA provided the identification and 
thwarting of the Heathrow Airport Plot as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. These representations were inaccurate. A review of records indicates 
that the Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf plotting had not progressed beyond the initial 
planning stages when the operation was fully disrupted with the detentions of Ramzi bin al- 
Shibh, KSM, Ammar-al-Baluchi, and Khallad bin Attash. None of these individuals were 
captured as a result of reporting obtained during or after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against CIA detainees. 

Further Details: After the September 11, 2001, attacks against the 
United States, KSM sought to target the United Kingdom using hijacked aircraft and surmised 
that Heathrow Airport and a building in Canary Wharf, a major business district in London, were 
powerful economic symbols. 1663 The initial plan was for al-Qa’ida operatives to hijack multiple 
airplanes departing Heathrow Aiiport, turn them around, and crash them into the airport itself. 
Security was assessed to be too tight at Heathrow Airport and the plan was altered to focus on 
aircrafts departing from mainly Eastern European airports to conduct attacks against Heathrow 
Airport. Al-Qa’ida was unable to locate pilots to conduct these attacks. 1664 Once KSM was 
detained in Pakistan on March 1, 2003, responsibility for the planning was passed to Ammar al- 
Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash, who were at the time focused on carrying out attacks against 
Western interests in Karachi, Pakistan. 1665 

The thwarting of the Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf plotting 
is one of the eight most frequently cited examples provided by the CIA as evidence for the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Over a period of years, CIA 
documents prepared for and provided to senior policymakers, intelligence officials, and the 
Department of Justice represent the Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf plotting as an example 
of how “[k]ey intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation 
techniques” had “enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots” and “capture additional terrorists.” 1666 
The CIA further represented that the intelligence acquired from the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was “otherwise unavailable” and “saved lives.” 1667 

1663 \yhji e t j ie qa refers to “Canary Wharf’ as a potential target of KSM’s plotting, intelligence records suggest the 
actual target was likely “One Canada Square,” the tallest building in the United Kingdom at the time of the plotting, 
which is located in Canary Wharf, a major business district in London. 

1664 See detailed intelligence chronology in Volume II. 

1665 See the Karachi Plots section in this summary, as well as additional details in Volume II. 

1666 j ta ij cs included in CIA Memorandum to the Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” from March 2, 2005. 

1667 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see: 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 




Page 295 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



F° r example, on December 23, 2005, CIA Director Porter Goss 
explained in a letter to National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley, Homeland Security Advisor 
Frances Townsend, and Director of National Intelligence John Negroponte, that he was 



“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[s] informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President explained 
[on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, the program 
has saved innocent lives.’” (See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence 
Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 
2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva 
Conventions to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda 
Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[t]ermination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” (See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” (See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and diat “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” (See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “SWIGERT and DUNBAR,” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, which 
provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailab le intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1111 I I III I 

Page 296 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET# 



/7 NQF O R N 



suspending the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques because of the passage of the 
Detainee Treatment Act (the “McCain amendment”). The letter stated: 



“...only 29 [CIA detainees] have undergone an interrogation that used one or 
more of the 13 [CIA enhanced interrogation] techniques. 1668 These 
interrogations produced intelligence that allowed the U.S., and its partners, to 
disrupt attacks such as 91 1-style attacks planned for the U.S. West Coast and 
for Heathrow airport. I can inform you with confidence that this program has 
allowed the U.S. to save hundreds, if not thousands, of lives .” 1669 



Similarly, the CIA informed the CIA inspector general on 

February 27, 2004, that: 



“As a result of the lawful use of EITs, KSM also provided information on an 
al-Qa’ida plot for suicide airplane attacks outside of the United States that 
would have killed thousands of people in the United Kingdom. . . .Of note, even 
after KSM reported that al-Qa’ida was planning to target Heathrow, he at first 
repeatedly denied there was any other target than the airport. Only after the 
repeated lawful use of EITs did he stop lying and admit that the sketch of a 
beam labeled Canary’ Wharf in his notebook was in fact an illustration that 
KSM the engineer drew himself in order to show another AQ operative that the 
beams in the Wharf - like those in the World Trade Center would likely melt 
and collapse the building, killing all inside.... We are still debriefing detainees 
and following up on leads to destroy this cell, but at a minimum the lawful use 
of EIT’s on KSM provided us with critical information that alerted us to these 
threats... r 1610 



NF) The CIA provided similar inaccurate representations regarding the 
Heathrow and Canary Wharf Plotting in 20 of the 20 documents provided to policymakers and 
the Department of Justice between July 2003 and March 2009. 1671 

A review of CIA operational cables and other documents found 
that contrary to CIA representations, information acquired during or after the use of the CIA’s 



1668 This information was incorrect. CIA records indicate that by December 23, 2005, at least 38 CIA detainees had 
been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

1669 Italics added. “Impact of the Loss of the Detainee Program to CT Operations and Analysis,” prepared to support 
a letter from CIA Director Goss to Stephen J. Hadley, Assistant to the President/National Security Advisor, Frances 
F. Townsend, Assistant to the President/Homeland Security Advisor, and Ambassador John D. Negroponte, dated 
December 23, 2005. 

1670 Italics added. CIA memorandum to the CIA Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for 
Operations, dated February 27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, 
‘Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program’ (2003-7 123-1G),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s 
Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities,” dated February 24, 2004. 

1671 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 
Volume II. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 



Page 297 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 




enhanced interrogation techniques played no role in “alert[ing]” the CIA to the threat to — or 
“disrupting]” the plotting against — Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf. 1672 

Pn° r t0 the detention and interrogation of the CIA detainees 
credited by the CIA with providing information on the plot, the CIA and other intelligence 
agencies were already “alerted” to al-Qa’ida’s efforts to target Heathrow Airport. Specifically, 
the CIA knew that: (1) KSM and al-Qa’ida were targeting “a national symbol in the United 
Kingdom” and that this symbol was the “Heathrow airport”; 1673 (2) the attack plan called for 
hijacking commercial aircraft and crashing them directly into Heathrow airport; 1674 (3) no pilots 
had been identified by al-Qa’ida and the planned attack was not imminent; 1675 (4) KSM, Ammar 

1672 As described in this Study, the CIA consistently represented from 2003 through 2009 that the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques resulted in “disrupted plots,” listed the “Heathrow Plot” as disrupted “as a result 
of the EITs,” and informed policymakers that the information acquired to disrupt the plotting could not have been 
obtained from other intelligence sources or methods available to the U.S. government. In at least one CIA 
representation to White House officials that highlighted the Heathrow plotting, the CIA represented that “the use of 
the [CIA’s enhanced interrogation] techniques has produced significant results,” and warned policymakers that 
“[tjermination of this [CIA] program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response 
states: “CIA disagrees with the Study’s assessment that [the CIA] incorrectly represented that information derived 
from interrogating detainees helped disrupt al-Qa’ida’s targeting of Heathrow Airport and Canary Wharf in London, 
including in President Bush’s 2006 speech on the Program. Detainee reporting, including some which was acquired 
after enhanced interrogation techniques were applied, played a critical role in uncovering the plot, understanding it, 
detaining many of the key players, and ultimately allowing us to conclude it had been disrupted. It is a complex 
story, however, and we should have been clearer in delineating the roles played by different partners.” As described 
in this summary, past CIA representations concerning the Heathrow Airport plotting and intelligence acquired “as a 
result of’ the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were inaccurate. (See, among other records, the September 
6, 2006, speech by President Bush, based on CIA information and vetted by the CIA, which describes the CIA’s use 
of “an alternative set” of interrogation procedures and stating: “These are some of the plots that have been stopped 
because of the information of this vital program. Terrorists held in CIA custody... have helped stop a plot to hijack 
passenger planes and fly them into Heathrow or Canaiy Wharf in London.”) Contrary to the CIA’s June 2013 
assertion, CIA records indicate that information related to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
played no role in “detaining many of the key players” and played no role in “uncovering the [Heathrow] plot.” CIA 
records indicate the Heathrow Airport plotting had not progressed beyond the initial planning stages when the 
operation was fully disrupted with the detention of Ramzi bin al-Shibh (detained on September 11, 2002), KSM 
(detained on March 1, 2003), Ammar-al-Baluchi (detained on April 29, 2003), and Khallad bin Attash (detained on 
April 29, 2003). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[b]y all accounts, KSM’s arrest was the action that 
most disrupted the [Heathrow] plot.” As detailed in this summary and in greater detail in Volume II, the capture of 
these detainees — including KSM — was unrelated to any reporting from CIA detainees. CIA records further indicate 
that details on al-Qa’ida’s targeting of Heathrow Airport were acquired prior to any reporting from CIA detainees. 
For example, prior to receiving any information from CIA detainees, the CIA acquired detailed information about 
al-Qa’ida’s targeting of Heathrow Airport, to include, but not limited to, the al-Qa’ida senior leaders involved, the 
method of the planned attack, the status of the operation, and the kunyas of two potential unwitting operatives in the 
United Kingdom. Finally, the CIA’s June 2013 Response claims that its past CIA representations were accurate and 
that CIA “detainee reporting, including some which was acquired after enhanced interrogation techniques were 
applied, played a critical role” in providing information, “ultimately allowing [CIA] to conclude it had been 
disrupted.” Prior to June 2013, the CIA had never represented that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques produced information “allowing [CIA] to conclude [the Heathrow Plot] had been disrupted.” Rather, as 
detailed in this summary and more fully in Volume II, the CIA represented that the information acquired “as a result 
of EITs” produced unique, otherwise unavailable “actionable intelligence” that “saved lives” and disrupted the 
plotting itself. A s detaile d, these representations were inaccurate. 

1673 DIRECTOR (1721 32Z OCT 02) 

1674 DIRECTOR (172132Z OCT 02) 

1675 DIRECTOR (172132Z OCT 02) 




Page 298 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




al-Baluchi, and Ramzi bin al-Shibh were involved in or knowledgeable about the plotting; 1676 
(5) al-Qa’ida was seeking to recruit numerous operatives, but potentially already had two 
operatives in place in the United Kingdom named “Abu Yusif ’ and “Abu Adel,” although the 
two operatives were unwitting of the plot; 1677 and (6) KSM was seeking Saudi and British 
passport holders over the age of 30 for the attack. 1678 

A review of records indicates that the Heathrow Airport plotting 
had not progressed beyond the initial planning stages when the operation was fully disrupted 
with the detentions of Ramzi bin al-Shibh (detained on September 1 1, 2002), 1679 KSM (detained 
on March 1, 2003), 1680 Ammar-al-Baluchi (detained on April 29, 2003), and Khallad bin Attash 
(detained on April 29, 2003,). 1681 There are no CIA records to indicate that any of the 
individuals were captured as a result of CIA detainee reporting. A draft National Terrorism 
Bulletin from March 2006 states: “the [Heathrow Airport] operation was disrupted mid-cycle, 
around the spring of 2003, when several of the key plotters, including KSM, were detained.” 1682 
Foreign government intelligence analysis came to the same conclusion. 1683 



) While each of these four detainees provided information on the 
plotting during their detentions, none of this information played any role in the disruption of the 
plot. A wide body of intelligence reporting indicated that no operatives were informed of the 



1676 [RE DACTE D] 20901 (301117Z SEP 02). See also CIA MKKSKKSBEKKM i 

1677 CIA mi mriH' In October 2002, months prior to KSM’s capture, Ramzi bin al-Shibh (RBS), 
who had not yet been rendered to CIA custody and therefore not yet subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, identified Abu Yusef and Abu Adil as potential U.K.-based Heathrow operatives. RBS described how 
the two English-speaking “al-Qa’ida suicide operatives” were dispatched to the United Kingdoir^^CSM^RBS 
provided a detailed description of the two potential operatives, as well as their travel. ( See CIA 

mm KSM was captured on March 1, 2003. The CIA’s June 2013 Response nonetheless asserts that “KSM 
also was responsible for helping us identify two potential operatives — known only as Abu Yusef and Abu Adil — 
whom al-Qa’ida had deployed to the United Kingdom by early 2002 and whom KSM wanted to tap for a role in a 
future Heathrow operation.” U.K. investigative efforts led to the identification of Abu Yusef, who then identified 
Abu Adil — who was already an investigati ve target of the U.K. government. In February 2004, the CIA reported 
that no CIA detainee was able to identify a photograph of Abu Yusif. See ALEC (262236Z FEB 04). 

1678 DIRECTOR mm ( 1 72 1 32Z OCT 02) 

1679 See section of this summary and Volume II on the “Capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh.” The CIA’s June 2013 
Response states that “the information provided by Abu Zubaydah played a key role in the capture of Ramzi Bin al- 
Shibh.” As described in the “Capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh” in this summary and in greater detail in Volume II, 
Ramzi bin al-Shibh was not captured as a result of information acquired during or after the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah. 

1680 See section of this summary and Volume II on the Capture of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM). The CIA’s 
June 2013 Response acknowledges that “[b]y all accounts, KSM’s arrest was the action that most disrupted the 
[Heathrow] plot.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts, however, that “[Abu] Zubaydah’s reporting also 
contributed to KSM’s arrest.” As described in the “Capture of KSM” in this summary and in more detail in Volume 
II, the capture of KSM was not attributable to any information obtained from the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program. 

1681 As described in the section of this summary related to the “Karachi PJot(s)” and in more detail in Volume 11, 
information from CIA detainees played no role in the arrests of Animar al-Baluchi or Khallad bin Attash. 

1682 See series of emails dated March 22, 2006, with the subject line, “RE:Abu Adel NTB Coord: Please Respond by 
14:00 Today (3/22). See also series of emails dated March 22, 2006, with the subject line, “RE: Abu Adel NTB 



Coord: Please Respon^>W4^0^^day(3/22). 
1683 DIRECTOR HH Mini 



Page 299 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



plot, no pilots were ever identified by al-Qa’ida for the attacks, and only schedules of potential 
flights were collected for review. 1684 



CIA detainee records indicate that reporting from CIA detainees on 
aspects of the Heathrow plotting was often unreliable and not believed by CIA officers. For 
example, KSM retracted information he provided while being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, including information linking Jaffar al-Tayyar to the Heathrow Plot. 1685 
On May 20, 2003, nearly two months after the CIA ceased using its enhanced interrogation 
techniques against KSM, a CIA analyst wrote that KSM had provided three different stories 
related to the Heathrow plotting, writing to CIA colleagues: “Bottom Line: KSM knows more 
about this plot than he’s letting on.” 1686 By late June 2004, KSM had retracted much of the 
varied reporting he had provided on the Heathrow plotting, most importantly the information 
KSM provided on tasking potential operatives to obtain flight training. 1687 KSM stated that 
during March 2003 — when he was being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques — “he may have given false information,” and that, in many cases, the information he 
provided was “just speculation.” 1688 The value of other CIA detainee reporting was also 
questioned by CIA officers. 1689 In July 2003, a cable from the CIA’s ALEC Station stated that 
“HQS/ALEC remains concerned with what we believe to be paltry information coming from 
detainees about operations in the U.K.” 1690 



In addition, KSM withheld information linking Abu Talha al- 
Pakistani to the Heathrow plotting. According to CIA interrogation records, KSM discussed 
Canary Wharf the first time he was shown his notebook, in which the words “Canary Wharf’ 
were written. 1691 KSM stated, however, that he had drawn the sketch for Ammar al-Baluchi. In 



(172132Z OCT 02). 




10883 (182127Z MAR 03); | 
10778 (121549Z MAR 03). 



|; subject: 



1684 Among other documents, see DIRECTOR ^ 

1685 See CIA WASHINGTONT)CB^H(122310Z MAR 03); 

10828 (15131 0Z MAR 03); ^^^f ll717 (201722Z M AY 03); | 

1686 See email from: [REDACTED]; to: cc: 

“K SM on H eathrow”; date: May 20, 2003, at 03:44 PM. 

22939 (031541Z JUL 04) 

22939 (031541Z JUL 04) 

In March 2003, after Ramzi bin al-Shibh had been rendered to CIA custody and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, CIA officers wrote that they did “not believe [Ramzi] bin al-Shibh” was “being completely 




honest” about potential Heathrow operatives. ( See ALEC | 



A June 2003 CIA cable 



states that “KSM, Ammar, and Khallad remain loathe to reveal details of the Heathrow plot,” and that the CIA 
believed the detainees were withholding information that could lead to the capture of Abu Talha al-Pakistani, noting 
specifically that the CIA detainees had “so far clung to such information” and “deflected questions.” By this time 
KSM, Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash had all been rendered to CIA custody and subjected to the CIA’s 



enhanced interrogation techniques. See ALEC 
information. 

1690 ALEC 

1691 



(172242Z JUN 03) and Volume III for additional 




(161 82 1 Z JUL 03) 

10787 (130716Z MAR 03). As described, the CIA represented that KSM “first repeatedly denied 
there was any other target than the airport,” and “[o]nly after the repeated lawful use of EITs did [KSM] stop lying 
and admit that the sketch of a beam labeled Canary Wharf in his notebook was in fact an illustration that KSM the 
engineer drew himself in order to show another AQ operative that the beams in the Wharf - like those in the World 
Trade Center would likely melt and collapse the building, killing all inside” ( See CIA memorandum to the CIA 
Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, dated February 27, 2004, with the 
subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program’ 
(2003-7123-IG),” Attachment, “Successe s of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities,” dated 

mi 1 1 ill 

Page 300 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



June 2003, after being confronted with contradictory reporting from Ammar al-Baluchi, KSM 
admitted that he had actually shown the sketch to “Talha,” whom KSM had not previously 
mentioned. 1692 

8. The Capture of Hambali 



Summary: The CIA represented that its enhanced interrogation 
techniques were effective and produced critical, otherwise unavailable intelligence, which 
thwarted plots and saved lives. Over a period of years, the CIA provided the capture of Hambali 
as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Specifically, 
the CIA consistently represented that, as a result of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
KSM provided the “first” information on a money transfer by Majid Khan that eventually led to 
Hambali’ s capture. These CIA representations were inaccurate. Majid Khan, who was in 
foreign government custody, provided this information prior to any reporting from KSM. CIA 
records indicate that the intelligence that led to Hambali’ s capture in Thailand was based on 
signals intelligence, a CIA source, and Thai investigative activities. 



February 24, 2004). As described, KSM discussed the sketch the first time it was shown to him. See 
10787 ( 130716Z M AR 03). 

1692 See ^■■■14420 ALECjH| (192314Z MAY 03); ■■■ 11717 (201222Z 

MAY03k^^^H 12141 (27223 1Z JUN 03);HHHl02 98 (131816ZMAR 03), disseminated as ■ 

The CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts that Abu Talha was “the individual managing the [Heathrow] 
plot.” Contrary to CIA assertions, CIA records indicate that Abu Talha served as an assistant to Ammar al-Baluchi 
and KSM and played no leadership or managerial role in the plotting. KSM reported that Abu Talha’s “primary 
skill [was] his ability to gather information,” and that Abu Talha would not have been able to take over the 
Heathrow plotting after the arrest of Ammar al-Baluchi and Khallad bin Attash, “stressj ing] that Talha was not well 
trained or particularly well connected to al-Qa’ida,” did not know all of the components of the Heathrow plotting, 
and had no links to the unwitting Saudi operatives KSM was considering using in the plotting. KSM stated that after 
the arrest of Ammar al-Baluc hi and Khal lad bin Attash, Abu Talha “would hav e known that the plot was 
compromised and over.” ( See 12141 (272231Z JUN 03); 20525 (141731Z FEB 04). For 

additional information on the two potential Saudi Arabia-based operatives, Ayyub and Azmari, who were 
investigative targets of a foreign government prior to detainee reporting, unwitting of the Heathrow plotting, and 
assessed by the CIA to have been killed or detained as a result of terrorist activity unrelated to the aforementioned 
plotting, see Volume II.). The CIA’s June 2013 Response further states that “CIA lacked reporting on Abu Talha 
prior to March 2003 and first learned of his specific role in the plot from debriefing KSM.” A review of CIA 
records found that on March 6, 2003, prior to any reporting from KSM or any other CIA detainee, Majid Khan, in 
foreign government custody, discussed Ammar al-Baluchi’s Karachi-based assistant, “Talha.” Majid Khan provided 
a phone number for Talha, and used tha t number at the request of his captors in an effort to l ocate and capture 
Ammar al- Baluchi through Talha. (See IHHflHl3678 (070724Z MAR 03); |^^|^^|Q3710 (081218Z MAR 
03); ALE C ■■ (081 830Z MAR 03);HH| 13695 (08061 1Z MAR 03)~H^Bl 1 1092 
jjm.) Ammar al-Baluchi, when he was in foreign government custody, provided a description of Talha, whom 
he called “Suliman,” and stated that he had dispatched Talha, aka Suliman, to the United Kingdom to identify 
operatives “ suitable for h ijacking or suicide operatio ns.” Amma r al-Baluchi also identified an email address used by 

I II i I I II ill li I II 14478j|^HmH ■■■ 14420 

14304 ■■■■^■TaLEC ||H a42334ZMAY 03).) As KSM had 
not yet me ntioned Abu Talha, Ammar al-Baluchi’s reporting prompted Deput y Chief of ALEC Sta tion 
| to note th at “KSM could be in trouble very so on.” ( See email from: to: 

m|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: action detainee 

branch - Re: ammar and KSM).) In the context of the U.K. Urban Targets Plot, the CIA’s June 2013 Response 
states: “Abu Talha’s arrest - a case CIA frequently cited as a success of the detainee program - would not have 
happened if not for reporting from CIA-held detainees.” As described elsewhere in this summary, and in greater 
detail in Volume II, CIA records do not su pport this statement. 

mi m in i mm i him 

Page 301 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOPSE G RET// 



// NOFORN 



Further Details: Riduan bin Isomuddin, aka Hambali, was a senior 
member of Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), a Southeast Asia-based terrorist group, and served as an 
interface between the JI and al-Qa’ida. Hambali was linked to terrorist activity prior to the 
September 11, 2001, attacks. Shortly after those attacks, Hambali was described as the CIA’s 
“number one target” in Southeast Asia. 1693 When the October 12, 2002, terrorist attacks 
occurred on the Indonesian island of Bali, killing more than 200 individuals, Hambali was 
immediately suspected of being the “mastermind” of the attacks and was further described as 
“one of the world’s most wanted terrorists.” 1694 

The capture of Hambali is one of the eight most frequently cited 
examples provided by the CIA as evidence for the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. Over a period of years, CIA documents prepared for and provided to 
senior policy makers, intelligence officials, and the Department of Justice represent the capture of 
Hambali as an example of how “[k]ey intelligence collected from HVD interrogations after 
applying interrogation techniques” had “enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots” and “capture 
additional terrorists.” 1695 The CIA further represented that the intelligence acquired from the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “otherwise unavailable” and “saved lives.” 1696 



1693 



DIRECTOR (241921Z MAR 02) 

1694 Among other news sources, see “The Secret Mastermind Behind the Bali Horror,” The Obseiver, 19 October 
2002 . 

1695 Italics included in CIA Memorandum to the Office of Legal Counsel, entitled, “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” from March 2, 2005. 

1696 From 2003 through 2009, the CIA’s representations regarding the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided a specific set of examples of terrorist plots “disrupted” and terrorists captured that 
the CIA attributed to information obtained from the use of its enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA 
representations further asserted that the intelligence obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was unique, otherwise unavailable, and resulted in “saved lives.” Among other CIA representations, see: 
(1) CIA representations in the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum, dated May 30, 2005, 
which relied on a series of highly specific CIA representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to assess their legality. The CIA representations referenced by the 
OLC include that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “necessary” to obtain “critical,” 
“vital,” and “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” that was “essential” for the U.S. government to “detect 
and disrupt” terrorist threats. The OLC memorandum further states that “[the CIA] ha[sj informed [the OLC] that 
the CIA believes that this program is largely responsible for preventing a subsequent attack within the United 
States.” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: 
Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques 
that May Be Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees.) (2) CIA representations in the 
Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel Memorandum dated July 20, 2007, which also relied on CIA 
representations on the type of intelligence acquired from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
Citing CIA documents and the President’s September 6, 2006, speech describing the CIA’s interrogation program 
(which was based on CIA -provided information), the OLC memorandum states: “The CIA interrogation program — 
and, in particular, its use of enhanced interrogation techniques — is intended to serve this paramount interest [security 
of the Nation] by producing substantial quantities of otherwise unavailable intelligence. ...As the President 
explained [on September 6, 2006], ‘by giving us information about terrorist plans we could not get anywhere else, 
the program has saved innocent lives.’” ( See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 
of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Tec hniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value 

TOP SECRE T//|^B[M^JBB^J//NQ¥ORN 

Page 302 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRE T# 



//NOFOR N 



As an example, in a briefing prepared for the president’s chief of 
staff, Josh Bolten, on May 2, 2006, the CIA represented that the “[u]se of the DOJ-authorized 
enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of a comprehensive interrogation approach, has 
enabled us to disrupt terrorist plots, capture additional terrorists, and collect a high volume of 
critical intelligence on al-Qa’ida.” 1697 The briefing document represents that “[assessing the 
effectiveness of individual interrogation techniques is difficult,” but provides 1 1 specific 
examples of “Key Intelligence Collected from HVD Interrogations,” including: 

“Hambali’s Capture: During KSM’s interrogation we acquired information 
that led to the capture of Hambali in August 2003 and to the partial 
dismantling of the Jemaah Islamiyah leadership in SE Asia. KSM first told us 
about Majid Khan’s role in delivering $50,000 to Hambali operatives for an 
attack KSM believed was imminent. We then confronted Khan with KSM’s 
admission and [signals intelligence] confirming the money transfer and Khan’s 
travel to Bangkok. Khan admitted he delivered the money to an operative 
named ‘Zubair,’ whom we subsequently identified and captured. Zubair’s 
capture led to the identification and subsequent capture of an operative named 



al Qaeda Detainees.) (3) CIA briefings for members of the National Security Council in July and September 2003 
represented that “the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had produced significant intelligence 
information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved lives,” and warned policymakers that “[t]ermination of 
this program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” (See August 5, 2003 Memorandum for the Record from 
Scott Muller, Subject: Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003; Briefing slides, CIA Interrogation 
Program, July 29, 2003; September 4, 2003, CIA Memorandum for the Record, Subject: Member Briefing; and 
September 26, 2003, Memorandum for the Record from Muller, Subject: CIA Interrogation Program.) (4) The 
CIA’s response to the Office of Inspector General draft Special Review of the CIA program, which asserts: 
“Information [the CIA] received... as a result of the lawful use of enhanced interrogation techniques (‘EITs’) has 
almost certainly saved countless American lives inside the United States and abroad. The evidence points clearly to 
the fact that without the use of such techniques, we and our allies would [have] suffered major terrorist attacks 
involving hundreds, if not thousands, of casualties.” ( See Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” 2003-7 123-IG; date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities.) (5) CIA briefing documents for CIA 
Director Leon Panetta in February 2009, which state that the “CIA assesses that the RDI program worked and the 
[enhanced interrogation] techniques were effective in producing foreign intelligence,” and that “[m]ost, if not all, of 
the timely intelligence acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by other 
means.” (See CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta, entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 
18FEB.2009” and graphic attachment, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from Abu Zubaydah and Khalid 
Shaykli Muhammad (KSM),” including “DCIA Briefing on RDI Program” agenda, CIA document “EITs and 
Effectiveness,” with associated documents, “Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment (AZ and KSM),” 
“Background on Key Intelligence Impacts Chart: Attachment,” and “supporting references,” to include “Background 
on Key Captures and Plots Disrupted.”) (6) CIA document faxed to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on 
March 18, 2009, entitled, “[SWIGERT] and [DUNBAR],” located in Committee databases at DTS #2009-1258, 
which provides a list of “some of the key captures and disrupted plots” that the CIA had attributed to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and stating: “CIA assesses that most, if not all, of the timely intelligence 
acquired from detainees in this program would not have been discovered or reported by any other means.” See 
Volume II for additional CIA representations asserting that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques enabled the 
CIA to obtain unique, otherwise unavailable intelligence that “saved lives.” 

1697 See May 2, 2006, Briefing for the Chief of Staff to the President: Briefing for Chief of Staff to the President Josh 
Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention and Inte rrogation Programs. 

hum ii ii i mi mu i 

Page 303 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Lilie who was providing forged passports to Hambali. Lilie identified the 
house in Bangkok where Hambali was hiding.” 1698 



Similarly, on July 13, 2004, the CIA disseminated an Intelligence 
Assessment entitled, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent Source on Al-Qa’ida.” 1699 On 
A pril 22, 20 05, the paper, as well as other materials on CIA detainee reporting, was faxed from 
|CTC Legal, to the Office of Legal Counsel at the Department of Justice, to support 
the OLC’s legal review of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1700 The document 
states: 



“...information that KSM provided on Majid Khan in the spring of 2003 
was the crucial first link in the chain that led us to the capture of 
prominent JI leader and al-Qa’ida associate Hambali in August 2003, 
and more than a dozen Southeast Asian operatives slated for attacks 
against the US homeland. KSM told us about [Majid] Khan’s role in 
delivering $50,000 in December 2002 to operatives associated with 
Hambali. . . . [Majid] Khan — who had been detained in Pakistan in early 
2003 — was confronted with KSM’s information about the money and 
acknowledged that he delivered the money to an operative named 
‘Zubair.’ . . .Based on that information, Zubair was captured in June 
2003. 1701 



On August 24, 2009, this document was declassified with redactions and publicly released with 
the inaccurate information unredacted. 1702 



The CIA provided similar inaccurate representations regarding the 
capture of Hambali in 18 of the 20 documents provided to policymakers and the Department of 



1698 Italics added. See May 2, 2006, Briefing for Chief of Staff to the President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, 
Detention and Interrogation Programs. The CIA’s June 2013 Response maintains that the chronology in this passage 
and similar representations are correct. The CIA’s June 2013 Response describes the following as “standard 
language” and the CIA’s “typical representation” of Hambali’s capture: “KSM provided information about an al- 
Qa’ida operative, Majid Khan, who he was aware had recently been captured. KSM — possibly believing the 
detained operatives was ‘talking’ admitted to having tasked Majid with delivering a large sum of money to 
individuals working for another senior al-Qa’ida associate. In an example of how information from one detainee 
can be used in debriefing another detainee in a ‘building block’ process, Khan — confronted with KSM’s information 
about the money — acknowledged that he delivered the money to an operative named Zubair and provided Zubair’ s 
physical description and contact number ” (italics added). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that this 
chronology is “accurate.” As detailed in this summary, and in greater detail in Volume II, this June 2013 CIA 
representation is inaccurate. Majid Khan — who was in foreign government custody — first provided information on 
the money exchange and Zubair, prior to any reporting from KSM. 

1699 CIA, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preeminent Source On Al-Qa’ida,” was authored by [REDACTED], 
CTC/UBLD/AQPO/AQLB. 

1700 CIA fax to the Department of Justice, entitled, “Hi, Materials on KSM and Abu Zubaydah. ||,” dated 22 
April 2005. For background on the intelligence product, see DTS #2004-3375. 

1701 Italics added. CIA Directorate of Intelligence, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Preem inent Source on Al-Qa’ida,” 
dated July 13, 2 004, faxed to the Department of Justice, April 22, 2005, entitled, “|^|, Materials on KSM and Abu 
Zubaydah. IH.” This report was widely disseminated in the Intelligence Community and provided to the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence on July 15, 2004. 

1702 See www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv /nation/docum ents/Khal id _Shayhk_M ohammad.pdf. 

m i 1 1 iii i 1 mi mu i 

Page 304 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



Justice between July 2003 and March 2009. 1703 In these representations, the CIA consistently 
asserted that “after applying” the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, KSM provided “the 
crucial first link” that led to the capture of Hambali. 1704 

A review of CIA operational cables and other records found that 
information obtained from KSM during and after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques played no role in the capture of Hambali. A review of CIA records further found that 
prior to reporting from CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
the CIA had intelligence on: (1) Hambali ’s role in the Jemaah Islamiyah; (2) funding by al- 
Qa’ida and KSM of Hambali’ s terrorist activities; (3) the operative to whom Majid Khan 
delivered the money, Zubair, and Zubair’s links to terrorism, Jemaah Islamiyah, and Hambali; 
and (4) Majid Khan’s $50,000 money transfer from al-Qa’ida to Zubair in December 2002. CIA 
records indicate that the intelligence that led to Hambali’ s capture was based on signals 
intelligence, a CIA source, and Thai investigative activities in Thailand. 1705 

Prior to his capture, Hambali was known to have played a 
supporting role in the KSM and Ramzi Yousef “Bojinka Plot,” an effort in early 1995 to place 
explosives on 12 United States-flagged aircraft and destroy them mid-flight. 1706 By the end of 
2001, Hambali was suspected of playing a supporting role in the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
attacks, as well as helping to enroll Zacarias Moussaoui in flight school. 1707 By early 2002, a 
body of intelligence reporting unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 
indicated that KSM was providing Hambali with funding to conduct terrorist operations in 
Southeast Asia. 1708 In March 2002, Hambali was described as the CIA’s “number one target” in 



1703 See list of CIA prepared briefings and memoranda from 2003 through 2009 with representations on the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques referenced in this summary and described in detail in 
Volume II. 

1704 Among other documents, see CIA Directorate of Intelligence, “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad: Pree minen t Source 
on Al-Qa’ida,” dated July 13, 2004, faxecUo the Department of Justice, April 22, 2005, fax entitled, ‘flil. 

Materials on KSM and Abu Zubaydah. H.” This Intelligence Assessment was widely disseminated in the 
Intelligence Community and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on July 15, 2004. On March 
31, 2009, former Vice President Cheney requested the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which was 
publicly released with redactions on August 24, 2009. See also C IA Memorandum for Ste ve Bradbury at Office of 
Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from Legal Group, DC1 

Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques” and Classified 
Statement for the Record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael V. Hayden, 
Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007 (DTS #2007-1563). 

1705 See intelligence chronology in Volume II for detailed information. 

1706 See United States Court o^ppeals^ugusOerm, 200 ^MS^^amzi Ahmed Yousef, and DIRECTOR 

JAN also CIA MAR 02). 

1707 December 15, 2001, CIA Briefing Docuirient^DCn^hlights/^e^/5|^ALE^^^^^^262150Z APR 02) and 

email from: REDACTED; to: REDACTED, and others; 

subject: “Debriefing results of Omani al-Qa’ida cell leader yields further connections between possibly Khalid 
Shaykh Muhammed and the East Asia al-Qa’ida network”; date: April 16, 2002, at 9:56:34 AM. See also 9/1 1 
Commission Report. 

1708 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, includin^ALE^^^^H (262150^AP^02). See also email from: 

[REDACTED]; to [REDACTED], HHUflHK and others; subject: 

“Debriefing results of Omani al-Qa’ida cell leader yields further connections between possibly Khalid Shaykh 
Muhammed and the East Asia al-Qa’ida network”; date: April 16, 2002, at 9:56:34 AM. 



Page 305 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O FORN 



Southeast Asia. 1709 That same month, the FBI provided information to the CIA stating that 
foreign government detainee reporting indicated that KSM reimbursed terrorism-related 
expenditures made by Hambali for the June of 2002, the CIA had entered into 

discussions with representatives of the government regarding their willingness to 

accept custody of Hambali once he was captured. 1711 On September 25, 2002, the CIA reported 
that an individual in FBI custody since May 2002, Mohammed Mansour Jabarah, reported that in 
November 2001, he collected $50,000 from KSM for a Hambali-directed terrorist operation 
targeting U.S. interests, as well as at least one other $10,000 payment. 1712 On the same day, 
September 25, 2002, a CIA cable stated that Masran bin Arshad, while in the custody of a 
foreign government, had detailed his connections to Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and KSM. 1713 
According to bin Arshad, after KSM’s “Second Wave” plotting was “abandoned” in late 2001, 
bin Arshad was tasked by KSM to meet with Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in Pakistan and to deliver 
$50,000 to Hambali for terrorist operations. Bin Arshad stated he was unable to deliver the 
money. 1714 When the October 12, 2002, terrorist attacks occurred on the Indonesian island of 
Bali, killing more than 200 individuals, Hambali was immediately suspected of being the 
“mastermind” of the attacks and was further described as “one of the world’s most wanted 
terrorists.” 1715 Open source information in October 2002 identified the funding for the Bali 
bombings as flowing through Hambali from al-Qa’ida leadership in Pakistan. Through 
November 2002, news reports highlighted links between senior al-Qa’ida leadership — including 
KSM — and JI in the context of the Bali bombings. Hambali continued to be identified as a 
potential mastermind of the bombing and likely residing in Thailand. These same reports 
identified a Malaysian named “Zubair” as one of three individuals sought by security officials for 
the Hambali-linked Bali bombings. 1716 



In early January 2003, coverage of a known al-Qa’ida email 
account uncovered communications between that account and the account of a former Baltimore, 
Maryland, resident, Majid Khan. The communications indicated that Majid Khan traveled to 
Bangkok, Thailand, in December 2002 for terrorist support activities and was in contact there 



1709 DIRECTOR 

1710 ALEC 
17,1 ALEC 

1712 I 



(241921Z MAR 02) 

(22150Z APR 02) 

041957Z JUN 02) 

See also “Terror Informant for FBI Allegedly Targeted Agents,” 
Washington Post , dated January 19, 2008, and Department of Justice documents on Mohammed Mansour Jabarah, 
including Jabarah’ s “Sentencing Memorandum.” 

1713 See section of this summary and Volume II on the “Information on the Facilitator That Led to the UBL 
Operation” for additiona l information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. Masran bin Arshad was in the custody of the 
at this time. 



government of 
1714 DIR ECTOR 
■■ 65903 




(251938Z SEP 02); 



|AUG 02); 



65902 




UG 02); CIA 



AUG 02); 



UG 02) 



17,5 Among other open sources, see “The Secret Mastermind Behind the Bali Horror,” The Observer, 19 October 
2002. 

1716 Among other open source reporting, see “The Sadness of Bali is the Sadness of the World,” The Strait Times, 
dated November 16, 2002; “Jemaah Islamiyah Still Capable of Major Terrorist Attacks,” Philippine Headline News, 
dated November 27, 2002; “Police Arrest 13 Linked to Bali Bombers, Uncovers Plot to Blow Up Bank,” AFP, dated 
November 26, 2002; “Bali Friends Have Arabia Link,” New York Post, dated December 2, 2002; “Finger Is Pointed 
At Bomber,” AFP-Hong Kong, dated November 26, 2002; and “Mastermind of Bali Bomb Arrested,” The Strait 
Times, dated November 22, 2002. 

mi m iii i i |( n ^ iu' 

Page 306 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



with a “Zubair.” 1717 By this time, the CIA had significant information — prior to KSM’s 
capture — indicating that a “Zubair” played a central supporting ro le in the JI, was affiliated with 
al-Qa’ida figures like KSM, had expertise in j n Southeast Asia, and was 

suspected of playing a role in Hambali’s October 12, 2002, Bali bombings. 1718 This information 
was derived from traditional intelligence collection, open source reporting, and FBI debriefings 
of Abu Zubaydah (prior to Abu Zubaydah being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques). 1719 On March 4, 2003, the day before Majid Khan’s capture, the FBI requested 
additional information from the CIA on the “Zubair” referenced in Majid Khan’s emails. 1720 

On March 6, 2003, the day after Majid Khan was captured in 
Pakistan, and while being questioned by foreign government interrogators using rapport-building 
techniques, 1721 Majid Khan described how he traveled to Bangkok in December 2002 and 



1717 ALEC (1701 17Z JAN 03). At this time open source reporting also placed Hambali in Thailand. See , for 

example, “FBI Report Pointed to Bali Bombing,” The Age, dated January 23, 2003; “Thailand’s Denial of Threat 
Fails to Convince,” AFP, dated November 15, 2002; “We’ll Hit You: Pre-Bali Alert,” Herald ( Australia ), dated 
November 16, 2002; “JI Terror Group Still Major Threat Despite Arrests,” Agence France Presse (AFP), dated 
November 26, 2002; “Indonesia Arrests a Top Suspect in Southeast Asia Tenor Network,” New York Times, dated 
December 4, 2002; and “Inside the Bali Plot: A TIME Inquiry Unearths the Roots of the Bombings and Shows How 
the Masterminds Remain at Large,” Time Magazine, dated December 9, 2002. 

1718 The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that the CIA “had some other information linking Zubair to al- 
Qa’ida’ s Southeast Asia network,” but states “that it was KSM’s information that caused us to focus on [Zubair] as 
an inroad to Hambali.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response further asserts: “KSM provided information on an al- 
Qa’ida operative named Zubair, we shared this information with Thai authorities, they detained Zubair, and he gave 
actionable intelligence information that helped us identify Hambali’s location.” This statement in the CIA’s June 
2013 Response is inaccurate. On October 25, 2013, the CIA acknowledged the inaccuracy. Confirming information 
in the Committee Study, the CIA stated that an additional review of CIA records by the CIA found that “No, KSM 
did not name Zubair in his debriefings.” 

17,9 In May 2002, prior to the application of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, Abu Zubaydah identified 
“Zubair” as a Malaysian national who was associated with KSM and who could be used by KSM to conduct attacks 
in Thailand. According to Abu Zubaydah, Zubair also “assisted Abu Zubaydah in obtaining passports from a printer 



facility in either Thailand or Malaysia.” ( See DIRECTOR | 



(271937Z MAY 02)| 



) In 



June 2002, Abu Zubaydah told an FBI interrogator that he sent a Canadian who sought to “help defend Muslims” in 



Indonesia to a Malaysian named Abu Zubair. (See \ 



10475 (141605Z JUN 02).) In July 2002, a U.S. 



military detainee stated that “Z ubair” w as a member of die Jemaah Islamiyah and was connected to Jemaali 

T|| 11691 (14171 2Z JUL 02). For odier intelligence identifyin. 



Islamiyah senior leaders. (See | 
of several individuals suspected o f being connected to the October 2002 Bali bombin 
(290615Z OCT 02); DIRECTOR 




“Zubair” as one 
95612 

| (202057Z OCT 02); and DIRECTOR ■■ ) Open 

source news reports highlighted links between senior al-Qa’ida leadership — including KSM — and Jemaah Islamiyah 
in the context of the Bali bombings. Hambali continued to be identified as a potential mastermind of the bombing — 
and likely residing in Thailand. These same reports identified a Malaysian named “Zubair” as one of three 
individuals sought by security officials for Hambali’s Bali bombings. Among other open source reporting, see “The 
Secret Mastermind Behind the Bali Horror,” The Observer, 19 October 2002; “The Sadness of Bali is the Sadness of 
the World,” The Strait Times, dated November 16, 2002; “Jemaah Islamiyah Still Capable of Major Terrorist 
Attacks,” Philippine Headline News, dated November 27, 2002; “Police Arrest 13 Linked to Bali Bombers, 

Uncovers Plot to Blow Up Bank,” AFP, dated November 26, 2002; “Bali Friends Have Arabia Link,” New York 
Post, dated December 2, 2002; “Finger Is Pointed At Bomber,” AFP-Hong Kong, dated November 26, 2002; “Inside 
the Bali Plot: A TIME Inquiry Unearths the Roots of the Bombings and Shows How the Masterminds Remain at 
Large,” Time Magazine, dated December 9, 2002; and “Mastermind of Bali Bomb Arrested,” The Strait Times, 
dated N ovember 22 , 2002. See intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional detailed information. 

8960 1 (042006Z MAR 03). 

13678 (070724Z MAR 03). According to CIA records, “a [foreign government officer] talked 
quietly to [Majid Khan] alone for about te n minutes before the interview began a nd was able to establish an 

T O P SECRE T//^^M^^^^M#NOFQRN 

Page 307 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQFORN 



provided $50,000 USD to “Zubair” at the behest of al-Qa’ida. Khan also stated that he updated 
KSM’s nephew, Ammar al-Baluchi, via email about the money exchange. Majid Khan’s 
physical description of Zubair matched prcviousintelligenc^ reporting already collected on 
Zubair. 1722 On March 10, 2003, the requested that information about 

Majid Khan’s travel to Thailand and his delivery of money to “Zubair” be shared with Thai 
authorities, along with the physica^escriptiot^f “Zubair” and a phone number for Zubair 
provided by Majid Khan. proposed that it inform the Thais that “[w]e 

are very concerned that the mone y mentioned may be funding terrorist activities, as well as the 
individuals in question,” and that request the Thai government “provide any details 

regarding these individuals and phone numbers.” 1723 

On March 11, 2003, after being confronted with information that 
confirmed KSM’s financial support to Hambali, KSM admitted to providing Hambali with 
$50,000 to conduct a terrorist attack “in approximately November 2002.” KSM made no 
reference to Majid Khan or Zubair. 1724 On March 17, 2003, after being confronted with Majid 
Khan’s reporting and a photograph of Majid Khan, KSM confirmed that Majid Khan — whom he 
stated he knew only as “Yusif’ — was involved in the money transfer to Hambali. 1725 KSM 
denied knowing Zubair — who would be the critical link to Hambali’ s capture — or any other 
Hambali representative in Thailand. 1726 




developing 

associated with Zubair. When the source was contacted b 



man 



2003, the CIA had learned that a source the CIA had been 
, received a call from a phone number 
the CIA, he descri bed a Malaysian 
1727 CIA officers 



excellent level of rapport. The first hour and [a] half of the interview was a review of bio-data and information 
previously [reported]. When [foreign government interrogators] started putting pressure on [Majid Khan] by pulling 
apart Ills story about his ‘honeymoon’ in Bangkok and his attempt to rent an apartment, safehouse, for his cousin 
[Mansoor Maqsood, aka Iqbal, aka Talha, aka Moeen, aka Habib], at 1400, [Majid Khan] slumped in his chair and 
sai d he would r eveal everything to officers....” 

13678 (070724Z MAR 03). Records indicate that this information was also disseminated in FBI 

For previous intelligence on Zubair’s physical description, see 



channels. See ALEC 

11715 



See also DIRECTOR 



See 



intelligence chronology in Volume II for detailed information. 



1723 



(DIRECTOR 

1724 



8155 3 (101010Z MAR 03). The request was approved by CIA Headquarters on March 12, 2003 
(March 12,2003)). 

10755 (11 1455Z MAR 03). See also DIRECTOR (1121 52Z MAR 03). ALEC Station had 

sent interrogators at the CIA’s DETENTION SITE BLUE at least two “requirements” cables with informatio n to use 
in the interrogation of KSM specifically about Hambali and KSM’s money transfers to Hambali. See ALEC 



(072345Z MAR 03); ALEC (0900 15Z MAR 03). KSM was rendered to CIA custody on March |, 2003, 

and immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques through March 25, 2003. 

1725 KSM was told the CIA had “stacks and stacks of emails,” and that CIA officers were going to do a “test of his 



honesty” by asking him a series of questions. See \ 



|10865 (171 648Z MAR 03). 



1726 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “KSM provided information on an al-Qa’ida operative named Zubair, we 
shared this information with Thai authorities, they detained Zubair, and he gave actionable intelligence information 
that helped us identify Hambali’s location.” This statement in the CIA’s June 2013 Response is inaccurate. In a 
document submitted to the Committee on October 25, 201 3, the CIA acknowledged the inaccuracy. Confirming 
information in the Committee Study, the CIA stated that an additional review of CIA records by the CIA found that, 
“No, KSM did not name Zubair in his debriefings.” See DTS #2013-3152. 




84783 

TOP SECRET/, 



T^ OFORN 



Page 308 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 





84908 



l It is un clear what spe cific actions the CIA or local authorities engaged in 

as a result of the information Zubair provided on [Business Q] while in foreign government custody. 

CIA records indicate that Thai authorities were engaged in their own unilateral efforts to track and identify leads 
related to Ham bali and Zubair. A June 28, 2003, CIA cable states that local authorities were investigating Zubair’ s 
links to various [busine sses]. Later, i n July 2003, th e CIA learned that Thai authorities had 

anoroached a “contact” who worked at [Business Q], 

The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges that prior to being transferred to CIA 

custody, “[d]uring [foreign go vernment] debriefing s, Zubair reporteckukhe 

and corroborated reporting on [Business Q] This information 

when combined with reporting from other sources to form a complete picture of Hambali’ s status was critical in 
helping identify Hambali’s general location and led to his arrest on 1 1 August by Thai [authorities],” A review of 
CIA records found that the r epo rting r eferenced was obtai ned prior to Zubair’s rendition to CIA custody. 

40568 ■HH 



84876 



41017 







In response to this 

information, H^^^^^^^^Hwrote, “ Wow.. this is just g reat... you guys are soooo closing in on Hmabali [sic].” 
(See email fromT||^^|||^^|; to: and others; subject: “wohoo — hilite for GA team 

pis. ...aliases for Hambali”; date: June 2003, at 9:51:30 AM.) As noted, CIA records indicate that Thai 
authorities were unilaterally following investigative leads related to Hambali and Zubair. It is unknown what 
specific investigative steps were taken by Thai authorities (or by the CIA) between early June 2003 and July 16, 



Page 309 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

































UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RE T# 



/ / NOFORN 



Q], t hey obtained 

H- 1737 An operatio^^argetmg^^^Himiim|||^m||^mim|^fw as developed that focused 
on surveillance of^^^HHd [Business Q], Asa result of this surveillance, and the 
cooperation of |^^^|^Hambali associate Amer was arrested on August 1 1, 2003. 1738 
Amer was immediately cooperative and assisted in an operation that led to the arrest of Lillie, 
aka Bashir bin Lap, that same day. 1739 Lillie was found to have a key fob in his possession 
imprinted with an address of an apartment building in Ayutthaya, Thailand. In response to 
questioning, “within minutes of capture,” Lillie admitted that the address on the key fob was the 
address where Hambali was located. Fewer than four hours later, an operation successfully led 
to Hambali’ s capture at the address found on the key fob. 1740 

(TS/M1^^»NF) On November 28, 2005, the chief of the CTC’s Southeast Asia 
Branch explained how Hambali was captured in an interview with the CIA’s Oral History 
Program, stating: 



“Frankly, we stumbled onto Hambali. We stumbled onto the [th e source] 
-kicking up the phone and calling his case officer to say there’s HHHI 
bHH [related to Zubair]. ...we really stumbled over it. It wasn’t police 
work, it wasn’t good targeting, it was we stumbled over it and it yielded up 
Hambali. What I tell my people is you work really, really hard to be in a 
position to get lucky.” 1741 



2003, to investigate [Busines^Q]. On July 16, 2003, the CIA learned that Thai 

authorities had been independently in contact with [Business Q]. After being transferred to CIA 

custody and rendered to the CIA’s COBALT detention site, Zubair was immediately subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanc ed interrogation techniques. Days later, on June 25, 2003, Zubair was as ked again about his effort s to obtain 
iocuments for Hambali, at which point Zuba ir again acknowledged using ||||||H^^^^^^^^J]3usiness 
QJ As noted, Zubair had previously identified | 

[Busine ss Q] while in foreign government custody 

fm|. The CIA has never claimed to policymakers that information obtained from Zubair after the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques led to Hambali’s capture. Nor are there any internal CIA records crediting 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Zubair as leading to Hambali’s capture. As noted, 
the CIA’s June 2013 Response sta tes: “During [foreign governm ent] debriefings, Zub air reported o n the 

| and corroborated reporting on [Business Q] 

|. This information when combined with reporting from other sources to form a complete picture of 
Hambali’s status was critical ii^ielpin^dentify Hambali’s general lo cation and led to his ar rest on 1 1 August by 
Thai [autho rities ] See also 1 

1 41017 






and Capture.” Lillie was later rendered to CIA custody. 

1741 Lillie had not yet been rendered to CIA custody. CIA Oral History Program Documenting Hambali capture, 
interview of [REDACTED], interviewed b^REDACTED]^)r^ovembei^8^005. 

mi 1 1 1 1 1 

Page 310 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Hambali was rendered to CIA custody on August 2003, and 
almost immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1742 On September 
4, 2006, he was transferred to U.S. military custody. 1743 



G. CIA Secondary Effectiveness Representations — Less Frequently Cited Disrupted Plots, 
Captures, and Intelligence that the CIA Has Provided As Evidence for the Effectiveness 
of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques 



c ) In addition to the eight most frequently cited “thwarted” plots and 
terrorists captured, the Committee examined 12 other less frequently cited intelligence successes 
that the CIA has attributed to the effectiveness of its enhanced interrogation techniques. 1744 
These representations are listed below: 



Additional Intelligence the CIA lias Attributed to of the CIA’s 

; ; iHii: Enhanced Interrogation Techniques II ;p : f - : 


1 


The Identification of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM) as the Mastermind 
of the September 1 1, 2001, Attacks 


2 


The Identification of KSM’s “Mukhtar” Alias 


3 


The Capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh 


4 


The Capture of KSM 


5 


The Capture of Majid Khan 


6 


The Thwarting of the Camp Lemonier Plotting 


7 


The Assertion That Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Help Validate 
Sources 


8 


The Identification and Arrests of Uzhair and Saifullah Paracha 


9 


Critical Intelligence Alerting the CIA to Jaffar al-Tayyar 


10 


The Identification and Arrest of Saleh al-Marri 


11 


The Collection of Critical Tactical Intelligence on Shkai, Pakistan 


12 


Information on the Facilitator That Led to the UBL Operation 





1241 

1242 (050744Z SEP 2215 (051248Z SEP 06) 

The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “our review showed that the Study failed to include examples of 
important information acquired from detainees that CIA cited more frequently and prominently in its representations 
than several of the cases the authors chose to include.” This is inaccurate. The CIA’s June 2013 Response provided 
three examples: the “Gulf shipping plot” (which is addressed in the full Committee Study and in this summary in the 
context of the interrogation of Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri), “learning important information about al-Qa’ida’s anthrax 
plotting and the role of Yazid Sufaat” (which is addressed in the full Committee Study and in this summary in the 
context of the interrogation of KSM), and “the detention of Abu Talha al-Pakistani” (which is addressed in the full 
Committee Study and in this summary in the section on the “Thwarting of the United Kingdom Urban Targets Plot 
and the Capture of Dhiren Barot, aka Issa al-Hindi.”). 

mi 1 1 1 ii i "i in mil' i 

Page 311 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



1. The Identification of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM) as the Mastermind of the 
September 11, 2001, Attacks 



(T The CIA represented that CIA detainee Abu Zubaydah provided 
“important” and “vital” information by identifying Khalid Shaykh Mohammed (KSM) as the 
mastermind behind the attacks of September 11, 2001. 1745 CIA Director Hayden told the 
Committee on April 12, 2007, that: 



“ — it was Abu Zubaydah, early in his detention, who identified KSM as the 
mastermind of 9/11. Until that time, KSM did not even appear in our chart of 
key al-Qa’ida members and associates.” 1746 



(TS// 



c ) On at least two prominent occasions, the CIA represented, 
inaccurately, that Abu Zubaydah provided this information after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. On May 30, 2005, the Office of Legal Counsel wrote in a now- 
declassified memorandum: 



“Interrogations of [Abu] Zubaydah — again, once enhanced interrogation 
techniques were employed — furnished detailed information regarding al 
Qaeda’s ‘organization structure, key operatives, and modus operandi’ and 
identified KSM as the mastermind of the September 11 attacks.” 1747 



1745 For example, in the September 6, 2006, speech validated by the CIA, President George W. Bush stated that: 
“[Abu] Zubaydah disclosed Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, or KSM, was the mastermind behind the 9/1 1 attacks and 
used the alias Mukhtar. This was a vital piece of the puzzle that helped our intelligence community pursue KSM.” 
See also CIA document dated July 16, 2006, entitled, “DRAFT Potential Public Briefing of CIA’s High-Value 
Terrorist Interrogations Program,” and “CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy” drafts supporting the 
September 6, 2006, speech by President George W. Bush. See also unclassified Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence release, entitled, “Summary of the High Value Terrorist Detainee Program,” as well as CIA classified 
Statement for the Record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael V. Hayden, 
Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007 (DTS #2007-1563). 

1746 CIA classified Statement for the Record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael 

V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007; and accompanying Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence hearing transcript for April 12, 2007, entitled, “Hearing on Central Intelligence Agency Detention and 
Interrogation Program.” {See DTS #200j^^6^n^DTS #2007-3158.) This testimony contradicted statements 
made in 2002 to theJoint Inquiry by in which she indicated that an operative arrested in 

February 2002 in prior to the capture of Abu Zubaydah^rovided“proof . . . that KSM was a senior al-Qa’ida 

terrons^larmer.” {See interview by the Joint Inquiry of [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED]; subject: Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM); date: 12 August 2002 (DTS #2002- 



4630).) 

1747 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al QaedaDetainees^^^^^^^^^^ 

n ii 1 1 ii i i Hi hi s 



Page 312 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



The OLC memorandum cited a document provided by the CIA to 
support the statement. 1748 The OLC memorandum further stated that the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provide the U.S. government with “otherwise unavailable actionable 
intelligence,” that “ordinary interrogation techniques had little effect on...Zubaydah,” and that 
the CIA had “reviewed and confirmed the accuracy of [the OLC’s] description of the 
interrogation program, including its purposes, methods, limitations, and results.” 1749 

In November 2007, the CIA prepared a set of documents and 
talking points for the CIA director to use in a briefing with the president on the effectiveness of 
the CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique. The documents prepared assert that Abu 
Zubaydah identified KSM as the “mastermind” of the September 11, 2001, attacks after the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1750 

While Abu Zubaydah did provide information on KSM’s role in 
the September 11, 2001, attacks, this information was corroborative of information already in 
CIA databases and was obtained prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 
There is no evidence to support the statement that Abu Zubaydah’ s information — obtained by 
FBI interrogators prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and while Abu 
Zubaydah was hospitalized — was uniquely important in the identification of KSM as the 
“mastermind” of the 9/1 1 attacks. 

(U) The following describes information available to the CIA prior to the capture of Abu 
Zubaydah: 

• (U) Both the Congressional Joint Inquiry Into the Intelligence Community Activities 

Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001, and the CIA Office of the 
Inspector General Report on CIA Accountability With Respect to the 9/11 Attacks 
include lengthy chronologies of the Intelligence Community’s interest in KSM prior to 
the attacks of September 11, 2001. The timelines begin in 1995, when the United States 
determined that KSM was linked to the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, 
leading to the determination by the National Security Council’s Policy Coordination 



1748 See CIA Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting, faxed to the OLC in April 2005. The “Briefing 
Notes” state: “Within months of his arrest, Abu Zubaydah provided details about al-Qa’ida’s organization structure, 
key operatives, and modus operandi. It also was Abu Zubaydah, early in his detention, who identified KSM as the 
mastermind of 9/11.” As described in detail in Volume II, this CIA document did not specifically reference the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques; however, it was provided to the OLC to support the OLC’s legal analysis 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The document included most of the same examples the CIA had 
previously provided as examples of the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. There are no 
records to indicate that the CIA, in reviewing draft versions of the OLC memorandum, sought to correct the 
inaccurate OLC statements. 

1749 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees. 

1750 “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” and supporting materials, dated November 6, 2007, 
with the notation the document was “sent toDCIANov^Mr^reparatioi^o^OTUS meeting.” 

m i 1 1 iii i mm 

Page 313 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



T O P SECRE T 



//NQFQRN 



Group that KSM was a top priority target for the United States. 1751 The Congressional 
Joint Inquiry further noted that information obtained prior to the September 11, 2001, 
attacks “led the CIA to see KSM as part of Bin Ladin’s organization.” 1752 There was also 
CIA reporting in 1998 that KSM was “very close” to UBL. 1753 On June 12, 2001, it was 
reported that “Khaled” was actively recruiting people to travel outside Afghanistan, 
including to the United States where colleagues were reportedly already in the country to 
meet them, to carry out terrorist-related activities for UBL. According to the 9/1 1 
Commission Report, the CIA presumed this “Khaled” was KSM. 1754 

• On September 12, 2001, a foreign government source, 
described as a member of al-Qa’ida, stated “the 1 1 September attacks had been 
masterminded from Kabul by three people,” to include “Shaykh Khalid,” who was related 
to Ramzi Yousef. 1755 

• Also on September 12, 2001, a CIA officer familiar with 
KSM wrote a cable stating that “[o]ne of the individuals who has the capability to 
organize the kind of strikes we saw in the World Trade Center and the Pentagon is Khalid 
Shaykh Mohammad.” 1756 

• On September 15, 2001, a CIA officer wrote to a number of 
senior CTC officers, “I would say the percentages are pretty high that Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammad is involved [in the September 11, 2001, attacks].” 1757 

• On October 16, 2001, an email from a CTC officer who had 
been tracking KSM since 1997, stated that although more proof was needed, “I believe 
KSM may have been the mastermind behind the 9-11 attacks.” 1758 



1751 Joint Inquiry Into the Intelligence Community Activities Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 
11, 2001, Report of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the House Permanent Select Committee on 
Intelligence, December 2002, pp. 325 - 331 (DTS #2002-5162); CIA Office of the Inspector General Report on CIA 
Accountability With Respect to the 9/1 1 Attacks, June 2005, pp. xi, 100-126 (DTS #2005-3477). 

1752 Joint Inquiry Into the Intelligence Community Activities Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 
11, 2001, Report of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the House Permanent Select Committee on 
Intelligence, December 2002j3^29 (DTS #2002-5162). 

1753 DIRECTOR (■■■SEP 98), disseminated as Office of the Inspector General 

Report on CIA Central Intelligence Agency Accountability Regarding Findings and Conclusions of the Report of the 
Joint Inquiry Into Intelligence Community Activities Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001 
(DTS #2005-3477), pp. 105-107. 

1754 The 9/1 1 Commission Report; Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United 
Statesmj^^7. 

1755 WKKM 64626 (131842Z SEP 01); 64627 (131843Z SEP 01) 

1756 CIA Office of the Inspector General Report on CIA Accountability With Respect to the 9/1 1 Attacks, June 2005, 

p. 113 (DTS #2 005-3477), 

from: to: cc: 

[REDACTED], m^H||U^[REDACTED]; subject: Re: RAMZI LEADS...; date: September 15, 2001, at 
5:04:38 AM. 

1758 CIA CTC internal email from: [REDACTED]; to multiple [REDACTED]; date: October 16, 2001, at 09:34:48 
AM. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 3 14 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 




3 A fore ign government informed the CIA that in late 

source, BHHHMHHNHMBbHHHKMHHH 

|, provided information on the attacks of September, 11, 2001, and 
stated, “Khalid Shayk Muhammad, the maternal uncle of Ramzi [Yousef].. . was the 
person who supervised the ‘final touches’ of the operation.” 1759 



• Other reporting piior to the capture of Abu Zubaydah stated 

that KSM was: “one of the individuals considered the potential mastermind”; 1760 “one of 
the top candidates for having been involved in the planning for the 1 1 September attacks” 
and one of “the masterminds”; 1761 and “one of the leading candidates to have been a 
hands-on planner in the 9/1 1 attacks.” 1762 



2. The Identification ofKSM’s “ Mukhtar ” Alias 



The CI A represented that CIA detainee Abu Zubaydah provided 
“important” and “vital” information by identifying Khalid Shaykh Mohammed’s (KSM) alias, 
“Mukhtar.” 1763 In at least one instance in November 2007, in a set of documents and talking 
points for the CIA director to use in a briefing with the president on the effectiveness of the 
CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique, the CIA asserted that Abu Zubaydah identified KSM 
as “Mukhtar” after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1764 



While Abu Zubaydah did provide information on KSM’s alias, this 
information was provided by Abu Zubaydah to FBI interrogators prior to the initiation of the 
CIA’s enhan ced interr ogation techniques — and while Abu Zubaydah was still in the intensive 
care unit of a hospital recovering from a gunshot wound incurred during his capture. 

Further, the information was corroborative of information already in CIA databases. 1765 Prior to 
the information provided by Abu Zubaydah, the CIA had intelligence, including a cable from 
August 28, 2001, indicating that KSM was now being called “Mukhtar.” 1766 




16218 

DIRECTOR The cable added “KSM is an ally of Usama bin Ladin and has been 

reported at facilities clearly associated with UBL.” 

1761 DIR NOV 01)- The cable referenced reporting that KSM, along with one other individual, 

“were the masterminds of the 11 September attacks.” 



1762 



DIR 



AN 02) 

1763 For example, in the September 6, 2006, speech validated by the CIA that publicly acknowledged the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program, President George W. Bush stated that: “[Abu] Zubaydah disclosed Khalid 
Sheikh Mohammed, or KSM, was the mastermind behind the 9/1 1 attacks and used the alias Mukhtar. This was a 
vital piece of the puzzle that helped our intelligence community pursue KSM.” 

1764 “dqa Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” and supporting materials, dated November 6, 2007 
with the notation the document was “sent to DCIA Nov. 6 in preparation for POTUS meeting.” 

1765 See Volume II, the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III, and Federal Bureau of Investigation 
documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu Zabaidah” provided to the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS #2010-2939). 

1766 93972 (281 153Z AUG 01). See also the 9/1 1 Commission Report: Final Report of the National 
Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, p. 277. The cable was directed to the CIA’s UBL Station, 
where it was viewed by the chief of Station and chief of targeting, and to the analytic unit responsible for UBL, 
where two analysts saw it. (See Office of the Inspector General Report on CIA Central Intelligence Agency 
Accountability Regarding Findings and C onclusions of the Report of the Joint In quiry Into Intelligence Community 

TOP SECRE TV7M|^B^^^^P^B//NOFQRN 

Page 315 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP-S E C RET// 



//NQFORN 



3. The Capture ofRamzi bin al-Shibh 



The CIA has represented that information acquired from CIA 
detainee Abu Zubaydah, as a result of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, led to the 
capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh. This CIA representation was included in President Bush’s 
September 6, 2006, speech on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. The speech, 
which was based on CIA information and vetted by the CIA, stated that the intelligence provided 
by CIA detainees “cannot be found any other place,” and that the nation’s “security depends on 
getting this kind of information.” 1767 The speech included the following: 



“Zubaydah was questioned using these procedures [the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques], and soon he began to provide information on key al- 
Qa’ida operatives, including information that helped us find and capture more 
of those responsible for the attacks on September the 1 1 th . 1768 For example, 
Zubaydah identified one of KSM’s accomplices in the 9/1 1 attacks, a terrorist 
named Ramzi bin al-Shibh. The information Zubaydah provided helped lead 
to the capture of bin al-Shibh. And together these two terrorists provided 
information that helped in the planning and execution of the operation that 
captured Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.” 1769 



■) While the speech provided no additional detail on the capture of 



<pm 

bin al-Shibh, an internal email among senior CIA personnel provided additional background for 



Activities Before and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001 (DTS #2005-3477), p. 1 12.) The CIA’s 
June 2013 Response states that “[w]e continue to assess that Abu Zubaydah’s information was a critical piece of 
intelligence.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response acknowledges the August 28, 2001, cable identifying KSM as 
“Mukhtar,” but states that CIA officers “overlooked” and “simply missed” the cable. 

1767 See President George W. Bush, Speech on Terrorism and the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 

September 6, 2006; and CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy, Wednes day, September 6, 2006, Draft #3 
(validating speech received on August 29, 2006); email from: [REDACTED]; to: HI 

IHHl; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED 1, 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED]; subject: “Speechwriter’s Questions on Monday”; date: September 5, 2006, at 10:30:32 AM. 

1768 Italics added. As described in this summary and in the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume 111, this 
statement was inaccurate. Abu Zubaydah provided information on al-Qa’ida activities, plans, capabilities, and 
relationships, in addition to information on its leadership structure, including personalities, decision-making 
processes, training, and tactics prior to, during, and after the utilization of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. Abu Zubaydah’s inability to provide information on the next attack in the United States and operatives 
in the United States was the basis for CIA representations that Abu Zubaydah was “uncooperative” and the CIA’s 
determination that Abu Zubaydah required the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to become 
“compliant” and reveal the information the CIA believed he was withholding — the names of operatives in the 
United States or information to stop the next terrorist attack. At no point during or after the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques did Abu Zubaydah provide this type of information. 

1769 Italics added. See President George W. Bush, Speech on Terrorism and the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program, September 6, 2006; and CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy, Wedne sday, September 6, 200 6, 
Draft #3 (validating speech received on August 29, 2006); email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

■■■■■■; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTEDUREDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
Him, [REDACTED]; subject: “Speechwriter’s Questions on Monday”; date: September 5, 2006, at 
10:30:32 AM. 



T O P - SECRET// 



// NQFORN 



Page 316 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SE C RET// 



//NOFORN 



why the CIA included “the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh” in the president’s speech as an 
example of the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanc ed interrogation tec hniques. After the speech, 
the ch ief of the Department in CTC, an email to the chief of 

CTC, ■■n C LegalT^^^^^^^^h, and two 

CIA Office of Public Affairs, among others. The email addressed press speculation that the 
intelligence successes attributed to CIA detainees and the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques in t he president’s speech were not accurate. Defending the accuracy of the speech, 
the chief of the Department in CTC wrote: “The NY Times has posted a story 

predictably poking holes in the President’s speech.” Regarding the CIA assertion that Abu 
Zubaydah provided information after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques that 
led to the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh, the chief explained: 



“...we knew Ramzi bin al-Shibh was involved in 9/1 1 before AZ was captured; 
however, AZ gave us information on his recent activities that -when added 
into other information — helped us track him. Again, on this point, we were 
very careful and the speech is accurate in what it says about bin al-Shibh.” 1770 




Department in CTC, 



) In addition, on F ebruary 17, 2007, the deputy chief of the H 
testified to the Senate Select Committee on 



Intelligence that Abu Zubaydah “led us to Ramzi bin al-Shibh, who in kind of [sic] started the 
chain of events” that led to the capture of KSM. 1771 



See from: to: Mark Mansfield, Paul 

Gimigliano, and others; subject: “Questions about Abu Zubaydah’s Identification of KSM as ‘Mukhtar’”; date: 
September 7, 2006. A September 7, 2006, article (published September 8, 2006) in the New York Times, by Mark 
Mazzetti, entitled, “Questions Raised About Bush’s Primary Claims of Secret Detention System” included 
comments by CIA officials defending the assertions in the President’s speech: “Mr. Bush described the 
interrogation techniques used on the C.I.A. prisoners as having been ‘safe, lawful and effective,’ and he asserted that 
torture had not been used. . . .Mr. Bush also said it was the interrogation of Mr. Zubaydah that identified Mr. bin al- 
Shibh as an accomplice in the Sept. 1 1 attacks. American officials had identified Mr. bin al-Shibh' s role in the 
attacks months before Mr. Zubaydah’s capture. A December 2001 federal grand jury indictment of Zacarias 
Moussaoui, the so-called 20th hijacker, said that Mr. Moussaoui had received money from Mr. bin al-Shibh and that 
Mr. bin al-Shibh had shared an apartment with Mohamed Atta, the ringleader of the plot. A C.I.A. spokesman said 
Thursday [September 7, 2006] that the agency had vetted the president’s speech and stood by its accuracy. . . .[CIA] 
spokesman, Paul Gimigliano, said in a statement... ‘Abu Zubaydah not only identified Ramzi Bin al-Shibh as a 9/1 1 
accomplice — something that had been done before — he provided information that helped lead to his capture.” 

For additional news accounts on this subject, see former CIA Director Michael Hayden’s interview with the New 
York Times in 2009, in which former Director Hayden “disputed an article in the New York Times on Saturday 
[4/1 8/2009] that said Abu Zubaydah had revealed nothing new after being waterboarded, saying that he believed that 
after unspecified ‘techniques’ were used, Abu Zubaydah revealed information that led to the capture of another 
terrorist, Ramzi Binalshibh.” See “Waterboarding Used 266 Times on 2 Suspects,” New York Times, dated April 20, 



2009. 

1771 CIA Testimony of 



Transcript, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, February 14, 2007 
(DTS #2007-1337). See also Memorandum to the Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for 
Operations, dated February 27, 2004, with die subject line, “Comments to Draft lG Special Review, 
‘Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program’ (2003-7123-IG),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s 
Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities,” dated February 24, 2004. Pavitt states: “Abu Zubaydah - 
a master al-Qa’ida facilitator - was similarly arrogant and uncooperative before the lawful use of EITs. ...His 
information is singularly unique and valuable from an intelligence point of view, but it also has produced concrete 
results that have helped saved lives. His k nowledge of al-Qa’ida lower-level fac ilitators, modus operandi and 

1 1 ii 1 1 ii 1 1 i ii ii i mi i 

Page 317 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



A review of CIA records found no connection between Abu 
Zubaydah’s reporting on Ramzi bin al-Shibh and Ramzi bin al-Shibh’s capture. CIA records 
indicate that Ramzi bii^^hibi^a^aptured unexpectedly — on September 11, 2002, when 
Pakistani authorities, IHHUHHHi, were conducting raids targeting Hassan Ghul in 
Pakistan. 1772 



While CIA records indicate that Abu Zubaydah provided 
information on Ramzi bin al-Shibh, there is no indication in CIA records that Abu Zubaydah 
provided information on bin al-Shibh’s whereabouts. Further, while Abu Zubaydah provided 
information on bin al-Shibh while being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, he provided similar information to FBI special agents prior to the initiation of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 1773 Prior to the application of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, during interrogation sessions on May 19, 2003, and May 20, 2003, Abu 
Zubaydah reviewed photographs of individuals known by his interrogators to be associated with 



safehouses, which he shared with us as a result of the use ofElTs, for example, played a key role in the ultimate 

capture of Ramzi Bin al-Shibh” (it alics added). 

'^^mon^the^ecords, .S£?^CIAB^^( SEP 02) CIA (|HHi SEP 02) 
ALEC ■■(11155 1Z SEP 02). 

1773 See additional information below, as well as the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III, and Federal 
Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu Zabaidah” 
provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS# 2010-2939). 

The CIA’s June 2013 Response includes the following: “...the Study states that Abu Zubaydah ‘provided similar 
information to FBI interrogators prior to the initiation of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques.’ This is 
incorrect. Abu Zubaydah’s unique information concerning his contact with Hassan Gul was collected on 20 August 
2002, after he had been subjected to enhanced interrogation techniques.” This assertion in the CIA’s June 2013 
Response contains several errors: First, as described, the statement in the December 13, 2012, Committee Study 
pertains to Abu Zubaydah’s reporting on Ramzi bin al-Shibh, not Hassan Ghul. As detailed in this summary and in 
other areas of the full Committee Study, while Abu Zubaydah provided information on Ramzi bin al-Shibh after the 
use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, he provided similar information on bin al-Shibh to FBI 
interrogators prior to the use and approval of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Second, as detailed in 
the full Committee Study, Abu Zubaydah provided considerable information on Hassan Ghul prior to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. (Some of this reporting has been declassified; for example, see the 9/1 1 
Commission Report, specifically the Staff Report, “9/1 1 and Terrorist Travel,” which highlights reporting by Abu 
Zubaydah on Hassan Ghul that was disseminated by the CIA on June 20, 2002.) Third, in referencing information 
that Abu Zubaydah provided on Hassan Ghul on August 20, 2002, the CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts that this 
was “unique information.” The CIA’s June 201^Respons^tates^AbuZubaydahstate^ if he personally 
needed to reach Hassan Gul, he would contact [a well-known 

associate of Hassan GhulfWeprovid^ to Pakistani authorities, who then interviewed [the well- 

known associate] and [a specific family member of the well-known associate] — which 

ultimately led them to an apartment linked to Gul.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response adds that the “unique 
information concerning his contact with Hassan Gul was collected on 20 August 2002, after [Abu Zubaydah] had 
been subjected to enhanced interrogation techniques.” CIA records indicate, however, that the information 
described in t he CIA’s Response was not unique. Pakistani authorities had raided the home and interviewed ■ 

[the same well-known associate] more than a month earlier on July |, 2002, based on similar reporting 
from a cooperating detainee in for eign government custody. The CIA had specific and detailed knowledge of this 
raid and the resultinginter^w of [the well-known associate]. Pakistani authorities remained in 

cont act with [the well-known associate], the primary person interviewed, who was cooperative and 

sent ■11 to help Pakistani authorities identify a possible al-Qa’ida safe house — which the CIA noted was 
“extremely close to (if not an exact match)” for a safe house the FBI connected KSM to weeks earlier on June 18, 
2002 . 

i iii 1 1 iii i i mi him i 

Page 318 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



the bombing of the USS Cole, as well as the September 11, 2001, attacks. Abu Zubaydah 
identified a picture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh as “al-Shiba” and “noted that he is always with” 
KSM. 1774 Another record of this interrogation stated that showing Abu Zubaydah the photos: 

“was done to gauge his willingness to cooperate and provide details about 
people, the last times he saw them, where they were going, etc. He appeared to 
be very cooperative, provided details on people that we expected him to know, 
the collective groups when they departed Afghanistan, where he thinks they 
may now be, etc.” 1775 



Shortly thereafter, on June 2, 2002, an FBI special agent showed 
Abu Zubaydah the FBI “PENTTBOM photobook” 1776 which contained photographs numbered 1- 
35. A cable states that Abu Zubaydah was volunteering information and was “forthcoming and 
responding] directly to questioning.” Abu Zubaydah, who was not asked any “preparatory 
questions regarding these photographs,” identified photograph #31, known to the interrogators as 
Ramzi bin al-Shibh, as a man he knew as al-Shiba, and stated al-Shiba was with KSM in 
Qandahar circa December 2001. Abu Zubaydah stated that al-Shiba spoke Arabic like a Yemeni 
and noted that al-Shiba was in the media after the September 1 1, 2001, attacks. 1777 

In early June 2002, Abu Zubaydah ’s interrogators recommended 
that Abu Zuba ydah spend several weeks in isolation while the interrogation team members 
traveled |m “as a means of keeping [Abu Zubayd ah] off-balan ce and to allow the team needed 
time off for a break and to attendtopersonal matters as well as to discuss “the 

endgame” of Abu Zubaydah with officers from CIA Headquarters. 1778 As a result, on 

June 18, 2002, Abu Zubaydah was placed in isolation. 1779 Abu Zubaydah spent the remainder of 
June 2002 and all of July 2002, 47 days in total, in solitary detentionwitta 
questions. During this period, Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogators The 

FBI special agents never returned to the detention site. 1780 

When CIA officers next interrogated Abu Zubaydah, on August 4, 
2002, they immediately used the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Zubaydah, 
including the waterboard. 1781 On August 21, 2002, while Abu Zubaydah was still being 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, a CIA cable noted that Abu Zubaydah 



1774 DIRECTOR m (271905Z MAY $ ee the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in 

Volume III for additional details. 

1775 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS 
#2010-2939). 

1776 Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu 
Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS 



#2010-2939). 




10428 (071058Z JUN 02) 
10424 (0708 14Z JUN 02) 
10487 (181656Z JUN 02) 



1780 See Abu Zu baydah detainee review in Volume III for additional details. 

1781 ■■■ 10644 (201235Z AUG 02) and email from: [REDACTED]; to: 

[REDACTED]; subject: “Re: So it begins.”^late^\ugus^^002^iU)945j0^AM. 

top - secre t//^MI^^^^M//noeorn 



and 



Page 319 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



was shown several photographs and “immediately recognized the photograph of Ramzi bin al- 
Shibh.” J782 Abu Zubaydah described bin al-Shibh as having “very dark, almost African looking” 
skin and noted that he first met bin al-Shibh after the 9/1 1 attacks in Kandahar, but added that he 
“did not have in-depth conversations with him.” 1783 A cable stated that, after being shown the 
photograph of bin al-Shibh, Abu Zubaydah told interrogators that he was told bin al-Shibh stayed 
at the same safe house that KSM “had established for the pilots and others destined to be 
involved in the 9/11 attacks.” 1784 An accompanying intelligence cable stated that Abu Zubaydah 
informed interrogators that he did not know — and did not ask — whether bin al-Shibh had been 
involved in the attacks of September 11, 2001, but did state that he believed that bin al-Shibh 
was “one of the operatives working for Mukhtar aka Khalid Shaykh Mohammad.” 1785 

The information Abu Zubaydah provided while being subjected to 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was described by CIA interrogators as “significant 
new details.” 1786 However, the information provided by Abu Zubaydah was similar to 
information Abu Zubaydah provided prior to the application of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, or was otherwise already known to the CIA. CIA records indicate that as early as 
September 15, 2001, Ramzi bin al-Shibh was identified as an associate of the September 11, 
2001, hijackers who attempted to obtain flight training in Florida. 1787 A July 27, 2002, cable 
from the CIA’s ALEC Station provided “background information” on bin al-Shibh and stated 
that he was “suspected of being the original ‘20th hijacker,’ whose participation in the 11 
September attacks was thwarted by his inability to obtain a visa to enter the United States.” 1788 
Ramzi bin al-Shibh was also identified as “a member of the Hamburg cell that included hijacker 
Mohammed Atta,” 1789 and bin al-Shibh was featured in one of “five suicide testimonial videos 
found in December 2001 at the residence of former UBL [Usama bin Ladin] lieutenant 
Mohammad Atef in Afghanistan.” 1790 

None of the above information resulted in Ramzi bin al-Shibh’ s 
capture. As detailed below, Ramzi bin al-Shibh was captured unexpectedly during raids in 
Pakistan on September 1 1, 2002, targeting Hassan Ghul. 1791 

Prior to Abu Zubaydah’ s capture, the CIA considered Hassan Ghul 
a “First Priority Raid Target,” based on reporting that: 




10654 (211318Z AUG 02); 
10654 (2I1318Z AUG 02); 
1 0654 (2 11318Z AUG 02); 
“TB (261338Z AUG 02) 
10654 (211318Z AUG 02); 
(222334Z SEP 01); 

(2701 32Z JUL 02) 

(2701 32Z JUL 02). See also 




10656 (21 1349Z AUG 02) 
10656 (21 1349Z AUG 02) 
10656 (21 1349Z AUG 02) 



10656 (211349Z AUG 02) 
92557 (15SEP01) 



1 97470 (281317Z MAR 02) (“In November 1998, 



[Muhammad] Atta, [Ramzi] Binalshibh, and [Said] Bahaji moved into the 54 Marienstrasse apartment in Hamburg 
that became the hub of the Hamburg cell.”). 



1790 



ALEC 



(2701 32Z JUL 02). See also 



62533 



(information from a foreign 



government concerning the al-Qa’ida suicide operatives portrayed on videotapes found in Afghanistan). 



1791 



ALEC (292345Z AUG 02); ALEC 

TOP SE C RET/, 




(1 1 1551Z SEP 02) 



/NOFORN 



Page 320 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



“Ghul has been a major support player within the al-Qa’ida network and has 
assisted al-Qa’ida and Mujahadin operatives by facilitating their travel. He is a 
senior aide to Abu Zubaydah who was heavily involved in fund raising for a 
terrorist operation in spring 2001. ” 1792 

Additional reporting noted that Hassan Ghul’s phone number had 
been linked to a terrorist operative who “was ready to conduct a ‘surgical operation’ at any 
time,” 1793 while other reporting indicated that Hassan Ghul was working on a “program” 
believed to be related to terrorist activity. 1794 

According to CIA cables, once captured, and prior to the initiation 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, Abu Zubaydah confirmed that Hassan Ghul was 
a high-level al-Qa’ida facilitator who had contact with senior al-Qa’ida members, including 
Hamza Rabi’a and Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. 1795 Abu Zubaydah also corroborated intelligence in 
CIA databases that Ghul was involved in al-Qa’ida fundraising efforts. 1796 During this same 
period, the CIA continued to receive additional intelligence on Ghul from foreign governments, 
including that Ghul was responsible for facilitating the movement of Saudi fighters through 
Pakistan. 1797 As noted, on June 18, 2002, Abu Zubaydah was placed in isolation and was not 
asked any questions for 47 days. 1798 

Li early July 2002, Pakistani authorities and the CIA were 
continuing their eff orts to locate and capture Hassan Ghul. A detainee in Pakistani custody, 

was 

information to Pakistani authoritie^i^^ssar^rhuL^^^^Wth^etainee in Pakistani 
custodyjhadbeen^ with BHU in on May 2002, during 

■■HHHHi government raids on multiple residences thought to be associated with 
al-Qa’ida. 1800 During interviews with Pakistani authorities concerning how to locat^mc^aptu re 
Hassan Ghul, [the detainee in Pakistani custody] identified 

BBHHI [a well-known associate of Hassan Ghul] and the location of the 
[well-known associate’s] home. 1801 

July |, 2002, see king to capture Hassan Ghul, Pakistani 
authorit ies^^^^^^^B^B raided the home of 

BHHI [the well-known associate of Hassan Ghul]. When the raid occurred, present at the home 



1792 ALEC 

1793 ALEC 




02 ); 

JAN 04) 



(241 447 Z MAR 02) 
(261712Z MAR 02) 

17369 (131519Z APR 02 
10091 (210959Z APR 02); 
10271 (151654Z MAY 02); 





10102 (230707Z APR 02); 



1295 



JAN 04); 



10091 (210959Z APR 02); 

10271 ( 151654Z MAY 02); ALEC 
(102312Z MAY 02) 

10487 ( 1 81656Z JUN 02) 

11746 

11336^^^1 VY02 ) 

11746 

T OP- SECRET E 



1010 2 (230707Z APR 02); 
(241447Z MAR 02) 





10144 (271949Z APR 
1308 (P 

10144 (271949Z APR 



/NOFOR N 



Page 321 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TO? SECRET// 



//NOFORN 




[the well-known associate], 

[JIBBjBBIand family m embers o f the well-known associate]. A ^H^HI providing 
details on the raid states that “|HI [the well-known a ssociate] was intervie wed on the spot 
and was fully cooperative with [Pakistani authorities] .” [the well-known 

associate] stated that he had not seen Hassan Ghul or HMBHHIIHHHHHHMNI 
since June 3, 2002, but that he believed they were still in Karachi. According to^^^Hfthe 
well-known associate], he had already in formed Pakistani authorities that Hassan Ghul was an 
al-Qa’ida member. According to a cable HHHIHHHiBI [the well-known associate] 
stated that, as a result of his reporting on Ghul to Pakistani officials, he rece ived “a death threat 
from Hassan Ghul,” causing Ghul to “cease coming to the [the well-known 

associate’s] house.” 1802 



CIA records indicate that Pakistani authorities continued to 
interviewtheJHBBBi [the well-known associate] in an effort to acquire information and 
capture Hassan Ghul. A CIA cable dated July |, 2002, states that the Pakistani government “is 
keying on any information whic h could get B closer to bagging [Hassan] Ghul,” specifica lly 

of [the 

well-known associate of Hassan Ghul].” According to the cable, during one of the interviews, 
flU [the well-known associate] told Pa kistani a uthorities about an address wher e Hassa n 
Ghul used to reside circa December 2001. HI [the well-known associate] sent with 

the Pakistani officers to identify the home. 1803 The CIA officers wrote that the location “is 
extremely close to (if not an exact match)” to a location where KSM once resided, according to a 
June 18, 2002, report from the FBI. 1804 The identified home was raided, but found empty. The 
CIA wrote “H are hitting the right places [safe houses], albeit at the wrong time. Our efforts 
have got us closer than e ver to at least Has san Ghul.” 1805 During the meetings between the 
Pakistani authorities and [the well-known associate], [the 

well-known associate] prov ided the Pakistani authorities with a copy ofa^^^H“reportedly 
belonging to HassanGhul” ,n the same cable, the 

CIA reported tha^^^^B [the well-loiowi^ssociat^^iad “approached the police for assistance 
in retrieving who was [a specific family member of the well- 

known associate]. 1806 



On July l^002^T^officers at CIA Headquarters wrote that they 
were reading the cables from theCIAH|JH^H^ noting they were “particularly interested 
in the intervie^^m^amed^B^^^^^^^^thewell-known associate of Hassan Ghul], 
admitted t0 knowledge of Ghul’s 

involvement in al-Qa’ida activities.” The cable stated: 



“[r]ecognize that |HI [the well-known associate] claims his contact with 
Ghul stopped approximately one mont h ago, when he repo rted Ghul to the 
Pakistani authorities. However, given [his close 





Referenced cable is ALEC 



| (1 8 1900Z JUN 02). 



117461 
11755 
11755 

11755 

ls,) ''’ See references to prior acquisition of passportin^^^^^Hl2151 (301107Z AUG 02). 

mi iii in in 

Page 322 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



# NOFORN 



association] to one of our high i nterest targ ets, request 
initiate technical surveillance of [the well-known associate’s] 

telephone... to determine if they may yield any information on Ghul’s current 
whereabouts.” 1807 

CIA records do not indicate if “technical surveillance” of [the well-known 

associate’s] telephone was conducted. 1808 

According to CIA records, once captured, and prior to the initiation 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, Abu Zubaydah confirmed that Hassan Ghul was 
a high-level al-Qa’ida facilitator who had contact with senior al-Qa’ida members, including 
Hamza Rabi’a and Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. Abu Zubaydah also corroborated intelligence in CIA 
databases that Ghul was involved in al-Qa’ida fundraising efforts. 1809 As noted, on June 18, 

2002, A bu Zubaydah was placed in iso lation and therefore was not questioned on the July 2002 
raids on |m^|^H|^H^^^^H[thewell-known associate’s] home or the information 
acquired from the interviews [the well-known associate] conducted by 

Pakistani authorities. 1810 On August 4, 2002, after Abu Zubaydah spent 47 days in isolation, 

CIA interrogators entered his cell and immediately began subjecting Abu Zubaydah to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, including the waterboard. 1811 As he had before the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, when asked questions, Abu Zubaydah continued to 
provide intelligence, including on Hassan Ghul. On August 20, 2002 — while still being 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — Abu Zubaydah was asked 
specifically how he would find Hassan Ghul. There are no records indicating that Abu Zubaydah 
had previously been asked this question. In response, Abu Zubaydahprovided^ 

S ' lg: that Hassan Ghul could possibly be located through HHHHHHHHNHHB 

[the well-known associate of Hassan Ghul]. 1812 There are no CIA records indicating that 
Abu Zubaydah provided information on the location of [the well-known 



,807 alec wbs mmmimm 

1808 As noted throughout this Study, CIA produced more than six million pages of material, including records 
detailing the interrogation of CIA detainees, as well as the disseminated intelligence derived from the interrogation 
of CIA detainees. The CIA did not provide — nor was it requested to provide — intelligence records that were 
unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. In other words, this Study was completed without 
direct access to reporting from CIA HUMINT assets, foreign liaison assets, electronic intercepts, military detainee 
debriefings, law enforcement-derived information, and other methods of intelligence collection. Insomuch as this 
material is included in the analysis herein, it was provided by the CIA within the context of documents directly 
related to the CIA Detention and Interrogation Program. As such, there is likely significant intelligence related to 
the terrorist plots, terrorists captured, and other intelligence matters examined in this Study that is within the 
databases of the U.S. Intelligence Community, but which has not been identified or reviewed by the Committee for 




10091 (210959Z APR 02); ^■Hl0102 (230707Z APR 02); 10144 (271949Z APR 

10271 (151654Z MAY 02)TaLEC^HH (241447Z MAR 02) 

10487 (181656ZJUN 02) 

10644 (201235Z AUG 02) and email from: [REDACTED]; to: jjjj||^^H| and 



[REDACTED]; subject: “Re: So it begins.”; date: August 4, 2002, at 09:45:09 AM. 

1812 ALEC ■■ (292345Z AUG 02) 

m i 1 1 i n i i mi mu i 



Page 323 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



associate’s] home, which, as noted, had been raided weeks earlier, on July |, 2002, and was 
already known to the CIA and Pakistani authorities. 1813 




c ) Nine days after Abu Zubaydah referenced 

[the well-known a ssociate of Hassan Ghul], on August 29, 2002, C IA Head quarters asked 
to request that Pakistani authorities “reinterview [the well-known 

associate] for additional intelligence on Hassan Ghul.” 1814 The next day, August 30, 2002, 

informed CIA Headquarters that Pak istani aut horities were “in contact with the 
[the well-knowr^ssociate],” but that would nonetheless ask the Pakistani 

authorities to question |^^H|^^^Hhth^vell-known associate] again about HassanGhuTs 
location. 1815 On August3lT2002^^BiB||^| relayed that Pakistani authorities and HIHI 
believed it was possible that well-known associate] was not beinj 

truthful in his interviews with Pakistani authorities. 181 6 On September 3, 2002, 
reported that Pakistani authorities had re-interviewed [the well- 

know n associate] an unknown number of times, and that the Pakistani authorities noted that at 
times HhHHH 



[the well-known associate] contradicted himself. 1817 A 
week later, on September 9, 2002, Pakistani aut horities returned aga in to 
well-known associate’s] home and interviewed 
the well-known associate], who had recently returned to 
associate’s home]. 1818 




woximately one 
[the 

[a spec ific family member of 
[the well-known 



11746 



HHBH HI The CIA’s June 2013 Response highlights the following statement in 
the December 13, 2012, Committee Study: “It is possible that the sourcing for CIA claims that ‘as a result of the use 
of ElTs’ Abu Zubaydah provided information that ‘played a key role in the ultimate capture of R arnzi Bin al-Shibh ,’ 
are related to Abu Zubaydah’s information indicating that Hassan Ghul could be located through 
[the well-known associate].” The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “It is true that Abu Zubaydah provided no 
information specifically on Bin al-Shibh’s whereabouts, but as the Study explicitly acknowledges, he did provide 
information on another al-Qa’ida facilitator that prompted Pakistani action that netted Bin al-Shibh.” The 
Committee could find no CIA records of the CIA ever making this claim externally, or internally within the CIA, 
prior to the CIA’s June 2013 Response. Rather, as described, the CIA claimed both before and after the President’s 
September 2006 speech that Abu Zubaydah provided information related to bin al-Shibh that resulted in bin al- 



Shibh’s capture. In an email from | 



and 



I, dated 



September 7, 2006, | 



| states: “... AZ gave us information on his recent activities that -when added into other 



1814 ALEC 

1815 



information — helped us track him.” The CIA’s June 2013 Res ponse asserts that the information Abu Zubaydah 
provided — that Hassan Ghul could possibly be located through [a well-known associate of Hassan 

Ghul] — was “unique information” and that bin al-Shibh’s “capture would not have occurred” “without Abu 
Zubaydah’s information,” which was collected “after he had been subjected to the enhanced interrogation 
techniques.” As detailed in this summary, and in greater detail in Volume II, the statement provided by Abu 
Zubayah was not unique, but corroborative of information already collected and acted upon by government 
authorities. 

(292345Z AUG 02) 

12148 (30060 1Z AUG 02) 

12151 (301107Z AUG 02) 

1 2207 (0505 24Z SEP 02) 

•sis while it is unclear from CIA records how Pakistani a uthorities learned [the specific family 

member of the well-known associate] had returned home^^^^H|^^||||B[the well-known associate] had 
sought the help of Pakistani authorities in retrieving m^^BTthespecific family me mber of the well-know n 
associate]. Further, the CIA in early July 2002 had requested “technical surveillance” of [the 

well-known associate^sjtelephone, and CIA records indicate that Pakistani authorities were maintaining regular 
contact with [the well-knownassociate]afterthei^ raid. 

mi Hi m i bbMHMHMBU i ,( >i oil 

Page 324 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 




In interviews with Pakistani authorities, [the 

specific family member of the well-known associate] was cooperative and told the Pakistani 
authorities where Hassan Ghul’s last apartment was located . 1819 Based on the information 
provided on Ghul’s apartment, Pakistani authorities conducted a raid, but found the apartment 
empty . 1820 





Pakistani authorities then located and interviewed 
H [a third individual at the apartment complex]. From the 



interview [of the third individual], Pakistani authorities learned th at while Hassan Ghul had 
vacated the apartment, he was scheduled to return to the complex 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



the arrest of 11 individuals, including Ramzi bin al-Shibh. 1829 According to CIA records, bin al- 
Shibh initially identified himself as ‘Umar Muhammad ‘Abdullah ba-‘Amr, aka “Abu 
‘Ubyadah,” but the CIA noted: 

“This individual strongly resembled pictures of Ramzi bin al-Shibh. When 
asked if he was videotaped in al-Qa’ida videos, he answered yes.” 1830 

Shortly thereafter the CIA confirmed Ramzi bin al-Shibh was the 
individual in Pakistani custody. 1831 

Hassan Ghul was ultimately captured by foreign authorities in the 
Iraqi Kurdistan Region, on January |, 2004. 1832 Hassan Ghul’s capture was unrelated to any 
reporting from the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 1833 

4. The Capture of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM) 



On September 6, 2006, President Bush delivered a speech based on 
information provided by the CIA, and vetted by the CIA, that included the following statement: 



“Zubaydah was questioned using these procedures [the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques], and soon he began to provide information on key al- 
Qa’ida operatives, including information that helped us find and capture more 
of those responsible for the attacks on September the 1 1 th . For example, 
Zubaydah identified one of KSM’s accomplices in the 9/1 1 attacks, a terrorist 
named Ramzi bin al-Shibh. The information Zubaydah provided helped lead 
to the capture of bin al-Shibh. And together these two terrorists provided 
information that helped in the planning and execution of the operation that 
captured Khalid Sheikh Mohammed 



1829 ALEC 

1830 CIA 

1831 



ALEC 




(1 1 1551 Z SEP 02) 

SEP 02) 

(130206Z SEP 02). The CIA’s June 2013 Response does not dispute the narrative described by 
the Committee, and states the “[CIA] should have more clearly explained the contribution [Abu Zubaydah’s] 
rep orting made to this op eration.” 

17531 



On January 2004, Hassan Ghul was transferred to U.S. military custody. On January 



was transferred to CIA custod 
released 

2441 




On August 2006, Ghul was rendered to | 
Hassan Ghul 



On Ma 



P 




Hassan Ghul 
|, 2007, he was 

See 



HEADQUARTERS 

; H EADQUARTERS 
173426 F 



T 




1775 



and Committee Notification from the CIA 



dated 



| (DTS #2012-3802). 



1834 Italics added. President George W. Bush, Sp eech on the CIA’s Terrorist Detention Program, (September 6, 
2006). See also CIA officer I 



|’s February 14, 2007, testimony to the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence in which she stated that Abu Zubaydah “really pointed us towards Khalid Shaykh Mohammad and how 
to find him,” adding “[h]e led us to Ramzi bin al-Shibh, who in kind of [sic] started the chain of events.” See 
transcript, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence^etouar^4^00^DT^2007-1337). 

mi 1 1 in i 

Page 326 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 




Contrary to CIA representations, there are no CIA records to 
support the assertion that Abu Zubaydah, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, or any other CIA detainee played 
any role in the “the planning and execution of the operation that captured Khalid Sheikh 
Mohammed.” CIA records clearly describe how the capture of KSM was attributable to a 
unilateral CIA asset (“ASSET X” 1835 ) who gained access to KSM through with 

whom t he CIA asset had prior independent connections. ASSET X’s possible access to KSM 
through was apparent to the CIA as early as the fall of 2001, prior to his formal 

recruitme nt. The CIA had multiple opportunities to exploit ASSET X’s access to KSM’s HH| 
in 2001, and in 2002, after he was recruited, but did not. In February-March 2003, 
ASSET X led the CIA directly to KSM. The contemporaneous documentary record of this 
narrative is supported by numerous after-action interviews conducted by the CIA’s Oral History 
Program. As the CIA officer who “handled” ASSET X and who was directly involved in the 
capture of KSM stated, “[t]he operation] was a HUMINT op pretty much from start to 
finish.” 1836 



'■) Within days after the attacks of September 11, 2001, CTC officers 



suspected KSM of playing a key role in the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 1837 Shortly 



thereafter, CTC officers also noted the “striking similarities” between the September 1 1 , 2001, 
attacks, and the 1993 World Trade Center bomb ing by KSM’s nephew, Ramzi Yousef, 
BHHHHHHHHHHHHi- 1838 On September 26, 2001, the CIA’s ALEC 



Station issued a cable on KSM and Ramzi Yousef that described extensive derogator; 

information, on 



1839 The CIA officer who drafted the September 26, 2001, 



1835 CIA records provided to the Committee identify the pseudonym created by the CIA for the asset. The Study 
lists the asset as “ASSET X” to further protect his identity. 

1836 TD INTERVI EW, CIA ORAL HIST ORY PROGRAM, S EPTEMBER 14, 2004], Presentation to the CTC 

14 September 2004 by HUHUHI- See also Interview of [REDACTED], by 
[REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 
September 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 3 December 2004, 
CIA Oral History Program; Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 30 November 2004, CIA Oral History 
Program; Interview of by [REDACTED], 25 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of 

[REDACTED], by [REDACTED]; 24 November & 15 December 2004, Cl^rnmistor^rogiarn. 

1837 See, for example, the September 15, 2001, email from a CIA officer to °f ALEC Station, in 

which the officer wrote, “1 would say the percentag es are pretty high that Kh ali d Sheikh Mohammad is i nvolve d [in 
the September 1 1, 2001, attacks].” See email from:JH^H^Hp^^^^|; to: m[|H; cc: |H| 

■■■, [REDACTED], |^^HMjRED^ T1 ED]; sub J ect: Re: RAMZI LEADS., 
date^eptember 15, 2001, at 5:04:38 AM). See also DIRECTOR HH (132018Z SEP 01), disseminated as 

* 83 m!lE^^HH (231718Z SEP 01). Ramzi Yousef is semne^if^entenc^i^h^Unite^ 

1839 A CIA source from 1995 reported that “all members are acting 

together on behalf of a largerandwelH)rganized group.” ^J^B^(fthesoiirce said, “are true terrorists and 
villains.” (Se^WHD^BjHHHBIHoCT 95).) Reporting from 1998 indicated that “Sheikh Khalid” (KSM), 
along with h ad “switched their a llegiance” and were “pa rt of the bin Ladin org anization in 

Afghanistan/^5^^DIRECTOI^^^H^^^^HSE^8)^isseminate^^H|^H|^^^^Hy^Cl^cables 
describe 



484112 



H 



[specific intelli gence collected on KSM’s 



UL 99); W HDC 
90757 ■■■frUL 95 ); CIA 



OCT 95); 



APR 95); 



Page 327 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






















Bit] 



eet 

,LEC 



1 



88666 



91147 ^^^■AUG 95); DIRECTOR 



69789 95); ^^^^H85526 



70158H^HMAR 95); 

UL 00); ALEC 99). 



1840 Email from: to: 

[REDACTED]; subiect^h^ousefcohorts^^^H- date: September 25, 2001, at 6:58:17 PM. 

1841 Email from: to: 



UN 95); DIRECTOR 



3245^^BIHiiH [spring] 01). See also 41495 

[REDACTED], by [RE DACTED], 14 October 2 004, CIA Or al History Program.) In 
would further indicate, 



ALEC ^^■(282144Z SEP 01) 



66193 ASSET X ideTTHHed 



ASSET X’s 



66177 






\ H [-»:! hMft fiRW i I »T; 



itra i&i 



66178 




UNCLASSIFIED 





























UNCLASSIFIED 




” 184(1 The following day, the cable was forwarded again to CTC officers 
with the subject line: “Access to Khalid Shaykh Muhammad.” 1847 

On 2001, ASSET X held his second meeting with CIA 

officers, who described ASSET X as “very willing to clandestinely ass ist the USG as 
directed.” 1848 At the same meeting, ASSET X identified a photograph 



, 2001, CIA Headquarters wrote that the 



CIA would be “keenly interested” if ASSET X “can dig into the [KSM] 



2001, ASSET X proposed multiple times to the CIA 


igh 




tpr 1851 















'ifinU^i ^1 ^ *i i!nl Iiif III n f 





inSKBr 






1846 Gmail from: 



1847 Email from: 






This is inaccurate. As detailed, ASSET X’s potential 
was apparent to the CIA in 2001 , prior to any CIA detainee reporting. 




nesaged the 2003 operation. See 
66530 01 



66586 




gSgEEggaS 



HBi 






CIA officers in 



66586 



[REDACTED]; inc luded in response email from: to: [REDACTED] ; cc: 

^ |, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: [ASSE^]^date^ovembe^5, 2001, 
at 6:54:40 AM.) The Station’s appeal was denied by ALEC Station. See ALEC HH[ 



66660 



continued to stress that ASSET X was a “financial risk worth taking. {See 
) ALEC Station remained in terested in ASSET X, but continued to o ppose the 
bv See ALEC HIHI HHHHHHI. See 



68881 68918 WHDC 67522 






Page 329 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 























KSM’s 



to locate 



■ 




■ 


, disseminated as 





,8M See CIA 

1856 CIA officers proposed recontacting a 1995 asset with possible access to KSM through 
(S ee email from: [REDACTED]; to: Jose Rodriguez, 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Finding Khalid Sheikh Muhammad; date: 



|, 2002, at 06:49:13 PM.) The email was resent, on 



|, 2002, to additional addressees. ( See email from: 



[REDACTED]; to: [RED ACTEDURED ACTED], [REDACTED], cc: subject: Finding 

Kha lid Sheikh Muhammad; date: 2002, at 3:46:13 PM.) At this point, the nefarious activities of KSM ’s 

were of significant interest to the Intelligence Community and policymakers. KSM’s m| 
errorism were briefed to the President and were the subject of a direct tasking by the Deputy 



Secretary of Defense. See ALEC 



The detainee was 






[DETAINEE S], 



66193 



31049 



31223 



31049 




31088 



31424 



I 





339 




|, disse 


;min 


ated as 



At this 



tun e, the C IA of fered a compensat ion p acka ge that_was increased from the CIA’s previous offer. 

1101 [ 

37701 



of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of [REDACTED], by 
[REDACTED], 14 September 2004^I^Oranffisto^^rogran^Durin^hi^im^^od^SSETX reportedthat he 
had made contact with KSM’s “*“* 



EBB 









; DIRECTOR 


HH 


ontinued to note that AS 


SET X 



481096 



mgSM 



i itii ixv nrB ii nu i JTi 



41495 



Page 330 of 499 

UNCLASSIFIED 
























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



his previous CIA case officer “handler” there had departed for another CIA assignment HH. 
ASSET X was thus handled by a new CIA officer who was unfamiliar with ASSET X’s potential 
utility in tracking KSM. 1862 Seeking guidance on how to proceed with ASSET X, the new CIA 
case officer sent several cables to CIA Headquarters, which he later described as disappearing 
into a “black hole.” According to an interview of a CIA officer involved in the operation, the 
cables were bein g sent to a special compartment at CIA Head quarters which had been previously 
used by the team With the dispersal of that CIA 

team, however, the compartment was idle and no one at CIA Headquarters was receiving and 
reading the cables being sent to the special compartment. 1863 When the CIA case officer 
received no response to the cables he was sending to CIA Headquarters, he madepreparations to 
terminate the C IA’s relationship with ASSET X. A ccording to interviews, in 2002, 

the CIA officer and was on his way to meet ASSET X to 

terminate the asset’ s relationship with the CIA. By chance, aCI^office^di^iad previously 
handled ASSET X was visiting This 

visiting CIA officer overheard the discussion between the chief of Base and the CIA case officer 
concerning the CIA’s termination of ASSET X as a CIA source. The discussion included names 
that ASSET X had beendiscussing the case officer ^ — names that the visiting 
officer recognized The visiting CIA officer interceded and recommended 

that the CIA Base delay the termination of ASSET X as a CIA sourceJ^^A^h^iexnneetm 
ASSET X again demo nstrated that he had direct access to KSM’s HBBBHHHIHHBHHNH 
m^im. 1865 As a result, the CIA decided not to terminate ASSET X’s work as a 
CIA source. 1866 



1861 37701 41495 2426 

1862 Interview of [REDACTED], by[RED ACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program. See \ 

IHHHIHB director HHI 

1863 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program. 



12431 



1864 ASSET X had been using the same names 



since 2001. See interview of 



[REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of [REDACTED], by 
[REDACTED], 14 September 2004, CIA Oral History Program. 

1865 [TD INTERV IEW, CIA ORAL HISTORY PROGRAM, SEPTEMBER 14, 2004] Presentation to the CTC 

14 September 2004. 

1866 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program. The CIA’s June 
2013 Response claims that the “CIA correctly represented that detainee reporting helped us capture [KSM].” This 
CIA assertion is based on an indirect chain of causation purporting to connect the reporting of Abu Zubaydah to the 
intervention of the visiting CIA officer and die subsequent capture of KSM. This account, which the CIA 
represented for the first time in June 2013, is inaccurate in numerous ways: (1) The CIA represents that 
“information provided by Abu Zubaydah... helped lead to the capture of Ramzi Bin al-Shibh [RBS].” The 
inaccuracies of this representation are described in this summary and in greater detail in Volume II. (2) The CIA 
represents that reporting from Ramzi bin al-Shibh (who was not in CIA custody at the time) regarding Ammar al- 
Baluchi was key to capturing KSM. This too is inaccurate. As detailed in the Study, Ammar al-Baluchi played no 
role in the operation that captured KSM, which centered around ASSET X and | 

The CIA represen ts that bin al-Shibh’s reporting on Ammar al-Baluchi was “used... to debrief | 

[DETAINEE Rj,” who was in foreig n government custody, and tiiat as a result, DETAINEE R 
discussed This not supported by CIA records. CIA 

records related to DETAINEE R’s interrogation in foreign go vernme nt custo dy indicate that DETAINEE R ’s 
report in 



rompted using a photograph and a letter. (See \ 




10118 



10158 



WASHINGT 



10116 




.) (4) The CIA r epresents that DETAINEE R’s inform ation on 

TOP SECRE T//gBiM|||M|^WW^NOFORN 

Page 331 of 499 



10120 



allowed 



UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



Shortly thereafter, in 2003, ASSET X traveled on his own 

volition, and without prior discussion with the CIA to 



and a face-to-face m eeting with KSM. When ASSET 

X later informed CIA officers about his tri 

direct access to KSM 




1868 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of 
[REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 3 December 2004, CIA Oral Histoiy Program 

1869 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program 

1870 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of 

[REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 September 2004, CIA Oral History Program; Interview of [REDACTED] by 
[REDACTED]; 24 November & 15 Dece mber 2004, CIA O ral His tory Program; Interview of [REDACTED1 bv 
[REDACTED], 30 November 2004. See ■■■■■ 41034 J ’ Dy 

•^^rvie^nREDACTED], by [REDACTED], 3 December 200^^On!HSory Program; DIRECTOR 



Page 332 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 





















1876 In an interview with the CIA’s Oral History Program, the 
CIA case officer described what happened: 

“We we nt around, you know, 

fAS SET XI turns around to me and says, look I don’t know, I guess 
I’m nervous, ^ said, Look are 

twenty five million frigging reasons why you need to find That s 

what the reward was. He looks at me and says, ‘I understand. I 
understand.’” 1877 

Shortly thereafter, ASSET X found and, in the early 

morning hours of March 1, 2003, Pakistani authorities conducted a raid and captured KSM. 

On March |, 2003, KSM was rendered to CIA custody. 1879 



1872 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program. 

1873 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral Histor^rogram^erview of 

r RED ACTED!, bv [REDACTED] , 3 Decem ber 2004, CIA Ora! History Program; 41490 

Interview of by [REDACTED], 25 October 2004, CIA Oral History Program; 

ServiewonREDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 September 2004, CIA Oral History Program. 

1874 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral HistorWJrogra^ of 

[REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 3 December 2004, CIA Oral History Program; 41490 



1875 Interview of [REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 14 October 2004, CIA Oral Histon^rogram^iterview of 
[REDACTED], by [REDACTED], 3 December 2004, CIA Oral History Program; 41490 



jfreTil 



Bwl 



1879 See 
in Volume III. 



41490 

10983 (24232 1Z MAR 03); 



10972 (241 122Z MAR 03); and the KSM detainee review 



Page 333 of 499 

UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ / N Q FORN 



5. The Capture of Majid Khan 



(TS/^^ The CIA represented that intelligence derived from the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against CIA detainee KSM led to the capture of Majid 
Khan. These representations were inaccurate. 

In multiple interviews with the CIA Office of Inspector General, 
CIA officers stated that “information from KSM led to the capture of [Majid] Kahn [sic],” and 
that “KS>^av^i^Maii^Chan.” 1880 The deputy chief of ALEC Station and former KSM 
debriefer represented that KSM “provided information that helped lead to the 

arrest of... Majid Khan, an operative who coul d get into t he U.S. easily.” 1881 The draft OIG 
Special Review repeated the representations of and others, stating that KSM “provided 

information that helped lead to the arrests of terrorists including... Majid Khan, an operative 
who could enter the United States easily and was tasked to research attacks against U.S. water 
reservoirs.” 1882 On February 27, 2004, DDO James Pavitt submitted the CIA’s formal response 
to the draft Inspector General Special Review. Pavitt’ s submission represented that Majid Khan 
was in custody “because of the information we were able lawfully to obtain from KSM.” 1883 The 
final, and now declassified, CIA Inspector General Special Review states that KSM “provided 
information that helped lead to the arrests of terrorists including... Majid Khan, an operative 
who could enter the United States easily and was tasked to research attacks....” 1884 In its 
analysis of the legality of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the OLC relied on 
passages of the Inspector General’s Special Review that included this inaccurate 
representation. 1885 



On July 29, 2003, CIA leadership met with select members of the 
National Security Council to obtain reaffirmation of the CIA interrogation program. The CIA 
stated that “detainees subject[ed] to the use of Enhanced Techniques of one kind or another had 
produced significant intelligence information that had, in the view of CIA professionals, saved 




1880 Interview of Jo hn E. McLaughl in, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 
September 5, 2003; 



|, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting 
Countert errorist Center Al-Qa’ida Department; date: 28 July 2003; Interview of | 

|, Office of the Inspector General, August 18, 2003. 

|, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Deputy Chief, Counterterrorist Center 
ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003. 

1882 CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program (2003-7123-IG), 
January 2004. 

1883 Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) 
Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7123-IG); 
date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

1884 CIA Office of Inspector General, Special Review - Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program, 
(2003-7123-IG), May 2004. 

1 885 

Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees, pp. 10-11, citing CIA Office of Inspector General, 
Special Review, pp. 85-91. 

Page 334 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 




lives.” 1886 Briefing slides provided by the CIA stated that “major threat” information was 
acquired, providing the “Identification of... the Majid Khan Family” by KSM as an example. 1887 
The same slides were used, at least in part, for subsequent briefings. 1888 On September 16, 2003, 
a briefing was conducted for Secretary of State Colin Powell and Secretary of Defense Donald 
Rumsfeld, the content of which was described as “virtually identical” to the July 29, 2003, 
briefing. 1889 The slides were also used in an October 7, 2003, briefing for Assistant Attorney 
General Jack Goldsmith. 1890 

CIA records indicate that Majid Khan was identified and located 
prior to any reporting from KSM. There is no indication in CIA records that reporting from 
KSM — or any other CIA detainee — played any role in the identification and capture of Majid 
Khan. 1891 

On January 10, 2003, the FBI’s Baltimore Field Office opened a 
full field international terrorism investigation on the email account “BobDesi(@)hotmail.com.” 
According to FBI investigative records, the investigation was “predicated upon information 
received through the Central Intelligence Agency(CIA)concerning” a known al-Qa’ida email 
account that was already “under FISA coverage HUH!” 1892 Six days later, on January 16, 
2003, open source research related to the “BobDesi” email account “revealed a personal website 



1886 CIA Memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “C/A Interrogation Program, ” dated 
July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. 

1887 See briefing slides entitled, “C/A Interrogation Program, ” dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House 
officials. Those attending the meeting included Vice President Richard Cheney, National Security Advisor 
Condoleezza Rice, White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, Attorney General John Ashcroft, Acting Assistant 
Attorney General Patrick Philbin, and counsel to the National Security Council, John Bellinger. 

1888 The CIA’s June 2003 Response states that “CIA mistakenly provided incorrect information to the Inspector 
General (IG) that led to a one-time misrepresentation of this case in the IG’s 2004 Special Review." The CIA’s June 
2013 Response adds that, “[tjhis mistake was not, as it is characterized in the ‘Findings and Conclusions’ section of 
the Study, a ‘repeatedly represented’ or ‘frequently cited’ example of the effectiveness of CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation program.” The CIA’s June 2013 assertion that this was a “one-time misrepresentation” is inaccurate. 
As described, the inaccurate information was provided numerous times to the Inspector General, in multiple 
interviews and in the CIA’s official response to the draft Special Review. Afterwards, the CIA relied on the section 
of the Special Review that included the inaccurate information on the capture of Majid Khan in obtaining legal 
approval for the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from the Department of Justice. This 
information was also provided by the CIA to the CIA’s Blue Ribbon Panel for their review of the CIA’s Detention 
and Interrogation Program. The CIA also included the inaccurate representation about the identification of Majid 
Khan and his family to the National Security Council principals on multiple occasions. Further, as noted, the 
inaccurate information in the CIA OIG Special Review was declassified and has been used in multiple open source 
articles and books, often as an example of the effectiveness of the CIA program. 

1889 Memorandum for the Record; subject: CIA Interrogation Program; September 27, 2003 (OGC-FO-2003-50088). 
Slides, CIA Interrogation Program, 16 September 2003. John B. Bellinger III, Senior Associate Counsel to the 
President and Legal Advisor, National Security Council; Memorandum for the Record; subject: Briefing of 
Secretaries Powell and Rumsfeld regarding Interrogation of High-Value Detainees; date: September 30, 2003. 

1890 Scott W. Muller; Memorandum for the Record; Interrogation briefing for Jack Goldsmith; date: 16 October 2003 
(OGC-FO-2003-50097). 

1891 For additional details, see Vo lumes II and Volume III. 

1892 See FBI 302 on FBI case file and 88793 |BH 




Page 335 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



for the user, Majid Khan.” 1893 In February 2003, |^HHi was tracking Majid Khan’s Internet 
activity and was confident he was located at his brother’s house in Karachi, Pakistan. 1894 On 
March 4, 2003, ALEC Station noted that activity on an al-Qa’ida email account — associated with 
Khallad bin Attash ^thaTwasj^ with Majid Khan, had bee n dormant. ALEC Station 

recommended that move to capture Majid Khan 

in the hope that Majid Khan could lead CIA off icers to Khallad bin A ttash. 1895 The following 
morning, March 5, 2003, officers from Pakistan|^^^^^|^m carried out a raid on Majid 
Khan’s brother’s house, detaining Majid Khan. 1896 

On March 15, 2003, Deputy Chief of ALEC Station IHH 
HWi M ill .in rniriil to CIA Headquarters noting that she had read the reporting from Majid 
Khan’s foreign government interrogations and was requesting photographs of Majid Khan and 
his associates to use in the KSM interrogations. 1897 CIA Headquarters provided the photographs 
the same day. 1898 On March 17, 2003, KSM was shown the photograph of Majid Khan and 
discussed the person he stated he knew as “Yusif,” for the first time. 1899 

6. The Thwarting of the Camp Lemonier Plotting 



The CIA represented that intelligence derived from the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques thwarted plotting against the U.S. military base, Camp 
Lemonier, in Djibouti. These representations were inaccurate. 



(U) In the September 6, 2006, speech, acknowledging the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program, which was based on CIA-provided information and vetted by the CIA, President 
George W. Bush stated: 



“This is intelligence that cannot be found any other place. And our security 
depends on getting this kind of information.” 



The speech continued: 



“These are some of the plots that have been stopped because of information 
from this vital program. Terrorists held in CIA custody have also provided 




1893 ALEC 

1894 

1895 ALEC 

1896 



(1 6014 1Z JAN 03) 

13571 (260330Z FEB 03) 
(040329Z MAR 03) 

13658 (0503 18Z MAR 03); I 



13659 (050459Z MAR 03); DIRECTOR 



(050459Z 



MAR 03). 

1897 Memorandum for: BHHIHHi' [REDACTED]; from: [REDACTED] .OFFICE: ^^^^[DETENTION 
SITE BLUE]; subject: Baltimore boy and KSM; date: 15 March 2003, at 07:08:32 PM. 

1898 ALEC Station sent DETENTION SITE BLUE photographs for use with KSM and other detainees. They 
included Majid Khan, Muhammad Khan, Sohail Munir, Iyman Faris^Maiid Khan’s cousin (Mansour), Fayyaz 
Kamran^ydinbelge, Khalid Jamil, and AafiaSiddiqui. See ALEC (152212 Z MAR 03 ). 

1899 10865 (171648Z MAR 03); ^■■■1 10886 (182219Z MAR 03); 10870 (172017Z 



MAR 03) 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 336 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 



information that helped stop the planned strike on U.S. Marines at Camp 
Lemonier in Djibouti.” 1900 

An Office of the Director of National Intelligence public release 
accompanying the September 6, 2006, speech, states that “the CIA designed a new interrogation 
program that would be safe, effective, and legal.” The document asserts: “In early 2004, shortly 
after his capture, al-Qa’ida facilitator Gouled Hassan Dourad revealed that in mid-2003 al- 
Qa’ida East Africa cell leader Abu Talha al-Sudani sent him from Mogadishu to Djibouti to case 
the US Marine base Camp Lemonier, as part of a plot to send suicide bombers with a truck 
bomb.” 1901 

Similarly, in a prepared briefing for the chairman of the House 
Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, John Murtha, on October 30, 2007, the CIA represented 
that the CIA could not conduct its detention operations at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, because 
“interrogations conducted on US military installations must comply with the Army Field 
Manual.” The CIA presentation stated that the CIA program was “critical to [the CIA’s] ability 



1900 See “CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy,” drafts supporting the September 6, 2006, speech by 

President George W. Bush acknowledging and describing the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, as well as 
an unclassified Office of the Director of National Intelligence release, entitled, “Summary of the High Value 
Terrorist Detainee Program.” In October 2007 CIA officers discussed a section of the President’s speech, which 
was based on CIA information and vetted by the CIA, related to Camp Lemonier. Addressing the section of the 
speech that states, “[t]errorists held in CIA custody have also provided information that helped stop the planned 
strike on U.S. Marines at Camp Lemonier in Djibouti,” a senior CIA officer highlighted that the plotting had not 
been stopped, but in fact was ongoing. The officer wrote: “I have attached the cable from Guleed that was used to 
source the Sept ‘06 speech as well as a later cable from a different detainee affirming that as of mid-2004, AQ 
members in Somalia were still intent on attacking Camp Lemonier... As of 2004, the second detainee indicates that 
AQ was still working on attacking the base.” The CIA officer explained that the “reasoning behind validation of the 
language in the speech — and remember, we can argue about whether or not ‘planning’ consistitutes [sic] a ‘plot’ and 
about whether anything is ever disrupted — was that the detainee re porting increased o ur awarenessofattack plotting 
against the base, leading to heightened security.” ( See email from: to: BHHIIII’ subject: 

“More on Camp Lemonier”; date: October 22, 2007, at 5:33 PM). The President’s reference to Camp Lemonier in 
the context of “this vital program” came immediately after the passage of the speech referencing the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against KSM and immediately before statements about the thwarting of the 
Karachi and Heathrow Airport plots, both of which have been explicitly attributed by the CIA to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The disruption of the Camp Lemonier plotting was also referenced as an 
intelligence success in the context of the March 2008 presidential veto of legislation that would have effectively 
banned the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. See “Text: Bush on Veto of Intelligence Bill,” The New York 
Times, dated March 8, 2008, which states, the “main reason this program has been effective is that it allows the CIA 
to use specialized interrogation procedures... limiting the CIA’s interrogation methods to those in the Army field 
manual would be dangerous. . . .” 

1901 Italics added. Unclassified Office of the Director of National Intelligence release, entitled, “Summary of the 
High Value Terrorist Detainee Program.” CIA records indicate that the CIA had intelligence that al-Qa’ida 
affiliated individuals were targeting Camp Lemonier with an “explosives-laden truck” in early 2003. The CIA 
sought to detain Gouled because of the intelligence already collected, indicating that in 2003 — at the likely behest of 
Abu Talha al-Sudani — Gouled was conducting casings of Camp Lemonier. Once captured, and prior to being 
transferred to CIA custody, Gouled confirmed that he cased Camp Lemonier for a potential terrorist attack. Despite 
the use of the term “revealed” in the 2006 document, the CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “We did not represent 
that we initially learned of the plot from detainees, or that it was disrupted based solely on information from 
detainees in CIA custody.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response further states that the CIA “agree[s] with the Study that 
[the CIA] had threat reporting against Camp Lemonier prior to the March 2004 detention and rendition” of Guleed 
Hassan Dourad. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 337 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 




to protect the American homeland and US forces and citizens abroad from terrorist attack,” that 
“[m]ost, if not all, of the intelligence acquired from high-value detainees in this [CIA] program 
would likely not have been discovered or reported in any other way,” that the CIA program “is in 
no way comparable to the detainee programs run by our military,” and that the CIA used 
information derived from the program “to disrupt terrorist plots — including against our 
military .” 1902 The CIA presentation then stated: 

“[A CIA detainee] informed us 1903 of an operation underway to attack the U.S. 

military at Camp Lemonier in Djibouti. We believe our understanding of this 

plot helped us to prevent the attack.” 1904 

A review of CIA records found that: (1) the detainee to whom the 
CIA’s representations refer — Guleed (variant, Gouled) Hassan Dourad — was not subjected to the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques; (2) the CIA was aware of and reported on the terrorist 
threat to Camp Lemonier prior to receiving any information from CIA detainees; 1905 (3) Guleed 
provided corroborative reporting on the threat prior to being transferred to CIA custody; and (4) 
contrary to CIA representations, the plotting did not “stop” because of information acquired from 
CIA detainee Guleed in 2004, but rather, continued well into 2007. 1906 

1902 Emphasis in original. See CIA Talking Points dated October 30, 2007, entitled, “DCIA Meeting with Chairman 
Murtlia re Rendition ahd Detention Programs” and attachments. 

1903 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “We did not represent that we initially learned of the plot from detainees, 
or that it was disrupted based solely on information from detainees in CIA custody.” The CIA’s October 30, 2007, 
talking points for the chairman of the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, John Murtha, make no 
reference to the CIA receiving intelligence on the Camp Lemonier plotting from other intelligence sources prior to 
CIA detainee reporting. Nor do the talking points indicate that the CIA detainee initially provided information on 
the plotting prior to being transferred to CIA custody. In addition, as described, an Office of the Director of 
National Intelligence public release on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogaton Program from September 6, 2006, 
states that “the CIA designed a new interrogation program that would be safe, effective, and legal;” and that “al- 
Qa’ida facilitator Gouled Hassan Dourad revealed” that he had been sent to “case the US Marine base Camp 
Lemonier.” 

1904 See CIA Talking Points dated October 30, 2007, entitled, “DCIA Meeting with Chairman Murtlia re Rendition 
and Detention Programs” and attachments. The talking points further state that the “Presidentially-mandated 
detention program is critical to our ability to protect the American homeland and US forces and citizens abroad from 
teiTorist attack.” The attachment to the document, labeled “points from CTC,” further asserts that while CIA 
rendition activities “did yield intelligence, it did not do so in a timely, efficient, and thorough way, raising 
unacceptable risks,” and that the CIA “experience has shown that exclusive control by CIA, in a Agency designed, 
built, and managed facility, allows us complete oversight and control over all aspects of detention, to include 
conditions of confinement, approved interrogation activities, humane standards, medical treatment, detainee 
engagement, security, hygiene, and infrastructure The document references a U.S. House of Representatives 
Appropriations bill providing a reduction in funding for the Covert Action CT Program and states: “Had the mark 
been directed against the rendition and detention programs sp ecific ally, the CIA would have recommended a 
Presidential veto. In its appeal, CIA detailed the impact of a $H million cut to the CA CT Program. The Agency 
also made it clear that it would continue the rendition and detention program because of the high value of these 
activities.” 

1905 See aforementioned CIA representations that: (1) “This is intelligence that cannot be found any other place. And 
our security depends on getting this kind of information,” and (2) “Most, if not all, of the intelligence acquired from 
high-value detainees in this [CIA] program would likely not have been discovered or reported in any other way.” 

As noted, the CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the CIA “agree[s] with the Study that [the CIA] had threat 
reporting against Camp Lemonier prior to the March 2004 detention and rendition” of Guleed. 

1906 See intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional information. 




Page 338 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



March 4, 2004, Guleed was captured in Djibouti based on 
information obtained from a foreign government and a CIA source. 1907 Prior to entering CIA 
custody, Guleed was confronted with information acquired from signals intelligence, and he 
confirmed that he cased Camp Lemonier for a potential terrorist attack. 1908 CIA sought to render 
Guleed to CIA custody in order to question Guleed about senior al-Qa’ida East Africa members 
Abu Talha al-Sudani and Saleh ali Saleh Nabhan. A CIA cable states: 



“Guleed represents the closest we have come to an individual with first hand, 
face-to-face knowledge of Abu Talha [al-Sudani] and Nabhan, and our hope is 
that Guleed will provide key intelligence necessary for the capture of these 
senior al-Qa’ida members.” 1909 



Prior to Guleed’ s rendition to CIA custody, he provided detailed 
information on his casing of Camp Lemonier to CIA officers. 1910 On March 2004, Guleed 
was rendered to CIA custody. 1911 There are no records to indicate that Guleed was subjected to 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, nor are there any CIA records to indicate that 
Guleed provided the information that was the basis for his rendition to CIA custody — 
information leading to the capture of Abu Talha al-Sudani or Saleh ali Saleh Nabhan. 



While in CIA custody, Guleed continued to provide information on 
his targeting of Camp Lemonier. Guleed stated that Abu Talha al-Sudani had not yet picked the 
operatives for the attack against Camp Lemonier, 1912 that the attack was “on hold while they- 



1907 HEADQUAR 
M AR 04). See also 

1908 ■ 




J 31 3 (041624Z MAR 04); HEADQUAR 



(04J935Z 



15623. 



93364 (Januar 
1909 HEAD QUAR 
1329 





8, 2008) 

93364 (January 8, 2008). 

The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “In March 2004, 

|, based [on] information from a clandestine source-detained and rendered to CIA custody the primary 
facilitator for al-Qa’ida’s Camp Lemonier plot, Guleed Hassan Ahmed, who had cased the Camp on behalf of al- 
Qa’ida. Guleed provided details about the plot and al-Qa’ida’s Somali support network, which drove CIA’s targeting 
efforts.’’ As described in this summary and in greater detail in Volume II, Guleed confirmed intelligence reporting 
already collected on his casing of Camp Lemonier prior to being r endered to CIA custody. See reference to material 
on recorded interrogations of Guleed Hassan Dourad in the cable, 



1911 

1912 



1543 



1573 (160217Z MAR 04), later reissued as CIA 
used to support the president’s speech on September 6, 2006. 

TOP SECRET/ 

Page 339 of 499 



■ 93364 (January 8, 2008). 
(021549Z APR 04)/ BH 

//N O F O R N 



and 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



raised the necessary funds via the bank robbery operation,” 1913 and that “he [Guleed] was not 
informed of the operational plan.” 1914 

Neither the detention of Guleed, nor the information he provided, 
thwarted terrorist plotting against Camp Lemonier; and CIA records indicate that attack planning 
against Camp Lemonier continued well after Guleed’ s capture in March 2004, to include a time 
period beyond the president’s September 6, 2006, speech. In March 2005, the CIA sought 
approval to render an associate of Guleed whom the CIA stated was “planning terrorist attacks 
on U.S. targets in East Africa, particularly against Camp Lemonier in Djibouti.” 1915 In October 
2005, a cable stated, “a body of reporting indicates that East Africa al-Qa’ida network operatives 
are currently planning attacks on U.S. interests in the region, particularly... the U.S. military 
base Camp Lemonier in Djibouti.” 1916 In April 2007, the continued terrorist threat reporting 
against Camp Lemonier resulted in a request for the Camp to further “alter their security 
practices.” 1917 

In October 2007, i n light of the ongoing threat reporting related to 
Camp Lemonier, CIA officer attempted to explain the CIA-validated 

statement in the president’s September 6, 2006, speech that “[t]errorists held in CIA custody” 
“helped stop the planned strike on U.S. Marines at Camp Lemonier in Djibouti.” 1918 



1913 



The CIA’s June 2013 Response links the “disruption]” of the Camp Lemonier plotting to 
the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program via the arrest of KSM, stating: “According to Khalid Shaykh 
Muhammad (KSM), his arrest in March 2003 (which we note in Example 12 resulted in part from information 
provided by Ramzi Bin al-Shibh) prevented him from transferring 30,000 euros from al-Qa’ida in Pakistan to al- 
Qa’ida in East Africa leaders, someofwhomwere plotting the Camp Lemonier attack. Funding shortages were cited 
repeatedly by detainees and in HHHHHI [technical collection] as a reason for the Camp Lemonier plot’s 
delays.” Prior to the CIA’s June 2013 Response, there were no CIA records attributing the delay or disruption of the 
plotting to the capture or detention of KSM. While a body of intelligence reporting indicated that funding shortages 
contributed to delays in the targeting of Camp Lemonier, no CIA intelligence records were identified that cite any 
deficit of expected funds resulting from KSM’s capture. As detailed in this Study, KSM was captured on March 1, 
2003. Intelligence reporting indicates that Abu Talha al-Sudani sent Guleed to case the sec urity at Camp Le monier 
more than six months later, in September 2003. In early March 2004, the CIA reported that 
[technical collection] revealed that “Abu Talha and Guleed were working together in search of funding necessary to 
carry out planned operations.” In late March 2004, after Guleed’s detention, several associates were detained after 
an attack on a German aid delegation, whichwassuspected of being an attempt to kidnap individuals for ransom. A 
cable reporting this information stated that^^^^^^l [technical collection] “indicated Abu Talha continues to 
press forward on plans to target Western interests in Djibouti.” Several days later, CIA officers surmised that the 
kidnapping attempt was likely an attempt “by Abu Talha to raise the operational funds for his plan to attack Camp 
Lemonier.” ( See intelligence chronology in Vohmielljinchidingre^ in HEADQ UARTERS 

m (101756Z MAR 04) and connected to ALEC (2221 22Z MAR 

04); and ALEC (292353Z MAR 04).) As detailed in the section of this summary and Volume II on the 

Capture of Khalid Shaykh Mohammad (KSM), the capture of KSM did not result from information provided by 
Ramzi bin al-Shibh. 

1914 I 



1915 Draft cable an email from: to: and subject: “Hfll 

DDO Approval to render Somali Jihadist and al-Qa’ida facilitator Ahmed Abdi Aw Mohammad to [CIA] control”; 
date: May 1 1 , 2005, at 5 :42:50 P M. 

1916 HEADQUAR TERS (252044Z OCT 05) 

10555 (101434Z APR 07) 



1917 



1918 See “CIA Validation of Remarks on Detainee Policy,” drafts supporting the September 6, 2006, speech by 
President George W. Bush acknowledging and describing the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, as well as 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 340 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOF -S E G RET// 



//NOFORN 



who was involved in vetting of the speech, wrote to a CIA colleague tracking the ongoing threats 
to Camp Lemonier that: 

“The reasoning behind [the CIA] validation of the language in the speech— and 
remember, we can argue about whether or not ‘planning’ constitutes [sic] a 
‘plot’ and about whether anything is ever disrupted— was that the detainee 
reporting increased our awareness of attack plotting against the base, leading to 
heightened security.” 1919 

(TS^HHIIH^) A review of CIA records, however, found no indication that CIA 
detainee reporting from Guleed, or any other CIA detainee, alerted the CIA or the U.S. military 
to increased terrorist targeting of Camp Lemonier. To the contrary, CIA records indicate that the 
CIA was in possession of substantial threat reporting demonstrating that Camp Lemonier in 
Djibouti was being targeted by al-Qa’ida and al-Qa’ida affiliated extremists prior to the detention 
of Guleed on March 4, 2004. 1920 For example, on January 28, 2003, a foreign government report 
disseminated by the CIA stated that al-Qa’ida operatives were planning “to ram an explosives- 
laden truck into a military base, probably Camp Lemonier.” 1921 On March 10, 2003, a “Terrorist 
Advisory” was issued, which stated that “U.S. forces stationed at Camp Lemonier in Djibouti... 
could be target ed.” 1922 Similar reporting continued through 2003, and by the end of the year, the 
CIA had coverage 1923 indicating that Guleed and other identified operatives were being 



an unclassified Office of the Director of National Intelligence release, entitled, “Summary of the High Value 
Terrorist Detainee Program.’ 

1919 See email from: 



ar, d others; subject: “More on Camp Lemonier”; October 
22, 2007, at 5:33 PM. In a reply email, a CIA officer wrote that Guleed’s statement was only “that the plan was 
suspended while Abu Talha tried to acquire the necessary funds,” and continued, “I don’t want anyone to walk away 
from this thinking that the POTUS speech from 2006 is the only language/view we are allowed to hold, especially 
since most or all of us were no t involved in the original coordination” of t he President’s Septe mber 6, 2006, speech. 
See email from: 



|; to [REDACTED] and [REDACTED]; cc: 



|; subject: “Camp 



1920 

1921 



Lemonier”; date: October 24, 2007, at 1 :22:44 PM. 

■■■I 1313 (041624Z MAR 04) 

See January 28, 2003, CIA Presidential Daily Brief, entitled, “Al-Qa’ida Planning Attack in Djibouti.” The 
CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the CIA “agree[s] with the Study that [the CIA] had threat reporting against 
Camp Lemonier prior to the March 2004 detention and rendition” of Guleed, but argues that the threat reporting 
provided to the President on January 28, 2003, had “no relation to [al-Sudani’s] plot,” and was “later recalled after 
being revealed to be a fabrication.” The CIA did not provide a date for the recall. The reporting, which indicated al- 
Qa’ida operatives were planning “to ram an explosives-laden truck into a military base, probably Camp Lemonier,” 
would later be corroborated by other intelligence reporting, including by Guleed in his description of al-Sudani’s 
plotting. See intelligence chr onolog y in Volume II. 

1922 CIA WASHINGTON DC 



17366 (121355Z MAR 03). The 



| (1 10056Z MAR 03). See also 
CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts that the March 2003 reporting was “an analytical assessment that Djibouti was a 
potential target given its US Military presence,” was “not based on specific intelligence,” and was analysis related to 
“a different al-Qa’ida cell.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response also disputes the relevance of the May 2003 reporting 
that al-Qa’ida affiliates were “waiting for the right time to cany out large-scale attacks, possibly involving suicide 
bombers, against a U.S. military base or U.S. naval ship in or near Djibouti.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response states 
that this threat reporting “was later found to be unrelated.” Notwithstanding these assertions, the CIA’s June 2013 
Response states that the CIA “agree[s] with the Study that [the CIA] had threat reporting against Camp Lemonier 
prior to the March 2004 detention and rendition” of Guleed. 






1923 ALEC (021825Z OCT 03) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 341 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET // 



//NOFORN 



directed by Abu Talha al-Sudani to target Camp Lemonier. 1924 By the end of December 2003, 
Djiboutian authorities confirmed that Guleed had cased Camp Lemonier and that Guleed 
appeared to have “formulate [d] a complet^argeting package, which included an escape 
route.” 1925 It was this reporting that led BHt t0 capture Guleed on March 4, 2004. 1926 

7. The Assertion that CIA Detainees Subjected to Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Help 
Validate CIA Sources 

In addition to CIA claims that information produced during or after 
the use of CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques led to the disruption of terrorist plots and the 
capture of specific terrorists, the CIA also represented that its enhanced interrogation techniques 
were necessary to validate CIA sources. The claim was based on one CIA detainee — Janat 
Gul — contradicting the reporting of one CIA asset. 



The CIA repeatedly represented to policymakers that information 
acquired after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques helped to “validate” CIA 
sources. For example, CIA Director Michael Hayden provided testimony to the Committee on 
April 12, 2007, that: 



“Detainee information is a key tool for validating clandestine sources. In fact, 
in one case, the detainee’s information proved to be the accurate story, and the 
clandestine source was confronted and subsequently admitted to embellishing 
or fabricating some or all [of] the details in his report.” 1927 



c ) Similarly, in January 2009, the CIA compiled a detailed briefing 
book for a planned three-hour briefing of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program for 
President-elect Obama’s national security staff. Included in the materials was a document that 
stated, “[k]ey intelligence [was] collected from HVD interrogations after applying [the CIA’s 
enhanced] interrogation techniques.” After this statement, the CIA provided examples, including 
that the “most significant reporting” acquired from CIA detainee Janat Gul after applying the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was information that helped the CIA “validate a CIA 
asset.” 1928 The document states: 



1924 Referenced in HEAD 
See also 

1925 CIA WASHINGTON DC 

1926 

1927 




(101756Z MAR 04) and connected to 



(302034Z DEC 03) / SERIAL: 

BHi 1313 (041624Z MAR 04) 

CIA classified Statement for the Record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael 
V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007; and accompanying Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence hearing transcript for April 12, 2007, entitled, “Hearing on Central Intelligence Agency Detention and 
Interrogation Program” (DTS #2007-1563). See also CIA Intelligence Assessment, “Detainee Reporting Pivotal for 
the War Against Al-Qa’ida,” June 2005, which CIA records indicate was provided to White House officials on June 
1, 2005, and was broadly disseminated on June 3, 2005, as an Intelligence Assessment. On March 31, 2009, former 
Vice President Cheney requested the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which was publicly released 
with redactions on August 24, 2009. 

1928 Italics in original. CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team - “Renditions, Detentions, and 
Interrogations (RDI)” including “Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009.” Referenced 
materials attached to cover memorandum with the title, “D/CIA Conference Room Seating Visit by President-elect 
Barrack [sic] Obama National Security Tean^uesday^^Januar^009^30 - 11:30 a.m.” Expected participants 

Page 342 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - RE G RET / / 



//NOFORN 



“Pakistan-based facilitator Janat Gul’s most significant reporting helped us 
validate a CIA asset who was providing information about the 2004 pre- 
election threat. The asset claimed that Gul had arranged a meeting between 
himself and al-Qa’ida’s chief of finance, Shaykh Sa’id, a claim that Gul 
vehemently denied. Gul’s reporting was later matched with information 
obtained from Sharif al-Masri an d Abu Talha al-Pakistani, captured after Gul. 

With this reporting in hand, CIA HH|^| the asset, who subsequently 
admitted to fabricating his reporting about the meeting.” 1929 

(TS//^B^HIH//NE) The CIA representation that the CIA's enhanced interrogation 
techniques produced information that allowed the CIA to identify the reporting of a CIA asset as 
fabricated lacked critical contextual information. The CIA representations did not describe how 
the CIA asset's reporting was already doubted by CIA officers prior to the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against Gul. Nor did the CIA representations acknowledge 
that the asset’s fabricated reporting was the reason that Janat Gul was subjected to the techniques 
in the first place. The CIA concluded that Janat Gul was not a high-level al-Qa’ida figure and 
did not possess threat information, but this conclusion was not included in CIA representations. 

(TS//HHHHIH//W) In March 2004, the CIA received reporting from a CIA asset, 
“ASSET Y,” 1930 that Janat Gul was planning with senior al-Qa’ida leaders to conduct attacks 
inside the United States. The attacks were reportedly planned to occur prior to the U.S. elections 
in November 2004. 1931 ASSET Y, who cited Janat Gul as the source of the information, stated 
that Gul was going to facilitate a meeting between Abu Faraj al-Libi and ASSET Y in support of 
the operation. 1932 As noted, CIA officers expressed doubts about ASSET Y’s reporting at the 



included, “Senator Boren, Mr. McDonough, Mr. Brennan, General Jones, Mr. Craig, Mr. Lippert, Mr. Smith, 



Senator Hagel,” as well as several CIA officials, including Director Hayden, | 



I, John Rizzo, 



[REDACTED], and 



TC Legal 



The briefing book includes the document “Briefing Notes 
on the Value of Detainee Reporting,” dated 15 May 2006, which provided the same intelligence claims found in the 
document of the same name, but dated April 15, 2005. The “Briefing Notes” document was provided to the 
Department of Justice in April 2005, in the context of the Department’s analysis of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 

1929 Italics added. CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team - “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations 
(RDI)” including “Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009.” Referenced materials 
attached to cover memorandum with the title, “D/CIA Conference Room Seating Visit by President-elect Barrack 
[sic] Obama National Security Team Tuesday, 13 January 2009; 8:30 - 1 1:30 a.m.” Expected participants included, 
“Senator Boren, Mr. McDonough, Mr. Brennan, General Jones, Mr. Craig, Mr. Lippert, Mr. Smith, Senator Hagel,” 



as wel l as several CIA officials, inc luding Director Hayden, | 
■■CTC Legal 



|, John Rizzo, [REDACTED], and 

The briefing book includes the document “Briefing Notes on the Value of 
Detainee Reporting,” dated 15 May 2006, which provided the same intelligence claims found in the document of the 
same name, but dated April .15, 2005. The “Briefing Notes” document was provided to the Department of Justice in 
April 2005, in the context of the Department’s analysis of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

1930 CIA records provided to the Committee identify the pseudonym created by the CIA for the asset. The Study 
lists the asset as “ASSET Y” to further protect his identity 



1931 WASHING TON 

1932 



19045 




MAR 04); 

T O P - SECRET/ 



AR 04) 

04) 

/NOFOR N 



Page 343 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



# NOFORN 



time it was received. 1933 A senior CIA officer, who formerly served as chief of 

the Bin Ladin Unit, raised questions about the reliability of the asset’s reporting on March 
2004, stating that the reporting was “vague” and “worthless in terms of actionable intelligence,” 
and that al-Qa’ida “loses nothing” by disclosing the information. He further stated that, given an 
al-Qa’ida statement emphasizing a lack of desire to strike before the U.S. election, and al- 
Qa’ida’ s knowledge that “threat reporting causes panic in Washington” and “leaks soon after it is 
received/^h^eporC^wouW be an easy way [for al-Qa’ida] to test” ASSET Y. 1934 ALEC Station 
officer expressed similar doubts about the source’s reporting in response to 

the email. 1935 

Less than thre e months later, Jan a t Gul was captured in on 

June H^2004. 1936 On June 2004, CIA’s proposed that Gul be rendered to 

CIA custody, citing ASSET Y’s reporting. 1937 During this period, however, the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques had been suspended by the CIA director. 1938 On June 29, 

2004, a draft memorandum from DCI Tenet to National Security Adviser Rice sought special 
approval from the National Security Council Principals Committee to use the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Janat Gul to learn more about the threat reporting from ASSET 
Y 1939 memorandum referenced ASSET Y’s reporting and stated that if the CIA could use 
the techniques, “the Agency would be in an optimum position to obtain from Gul critical 
intelligence necessary to save American lives by disrupting the pre-election plot, locating senior 
al-Qa’ida leaders still at large, and learning how Usama Bin Laden communicates with his 
operatives.” The memorandum further stated that “[gjiven the magnitude of the danger posed by 



1933 Email from: 



to: [REDACTED], 

|; subject: could AQ be testing [ASSET Y] and [Source Name REDACTED]?; date: March| 
2004, at 06:55 AM. 

' 93 H5maiHromjp(||^^^^^J; to: [REDACTED], 

H^^^B^HB^uhject: could AQ be testing [ASSET Y] and [Source Name REDACTED]?; date: March| 
2004, at 06:55 AM. The emaiUeferences a March 17, 2004, al-Qa’ida statement. Speaking of a se cond source 
jroviding threat reporting, noted that “i [sic] have always been concerned that [the asset] 



1935 Email from: 
[REDACTED], 
RE DACTED]?; d ate: March 

1936 3121 

1937 



to cc: 

; subject: Re: could AQ be testing [ASSET Y] and [Source Name 
, 2004, at 7:52:32 A M. __ 

3111 

See 3633 (||||^^^Bf04)7which states “Gul is the source of [ASSET Y’s] pre-election threat 

information. This information forms a substantial part of the USG’s current pre-election threat assessment. Station 
believes that if Gul has pre-election threat information, we must exploit him using our b est resour ces. Those 
resources do not exist in Station has interrogated many al-Qa’ida members in and while we have 

been successful at times, our best information is obtained when the detainee is interrogated in a CIA controlled 
facility ([DETENTION SITE COBALT] or blacksite).” 

1938 Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Director of Central Intelligence, June 4, 2004, subject, 
“Suspension of Use of Interrogation Techniques.” Memorandum for the National Security Advisor from DCI 
George Tenet, June 4, 2004, re Review of CIA Interrogation Program. 

1939 Draft memorandum from Georg e Tenet to National Se curity Advisor re Counterterrorist Interrogation 

Techniques, attached to email from: Moseman, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

Stanley Moskowitz, Scott Muller, John Rizzo7|^^^HH and IHHAHli'’ subject: Draft Documents 
for Friday’s NSC Meeting; date: June 29, 2004. 

TOP 

Page 344 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 




the pre-election plot, and [Janat] Gul’s almost certain knowledge of any intelligence about that 
plot, I request the fastest possible resolution of the above issues.” 1940 

On July 2, 2004, the day that CIA Headquarters approved the 
rendition of Janat Gul to CIA custody, 1941 the CIA represented to select members of the National 
Security Council that Janat Gul was one of the “most senior radical Islamic facilitators in 
Pakistan,” and noted that he was “assessed by a key source on [the] pre-election plot to be 
involved in or [to] have information on the plot.” 1942 On July 15, 2004, based on the reporting of 
ASSET Y, the CIA represented to the chairman and vice chairman of the Committee that Janat 
Gul was associated with a pre-election plot to conduct an attack in the United States. 1943 On July 
20, 2004, select National Security Council principals met again, and according to CIA records, 
agreed that, “[gjiven the current threat and risk of delay, CIA was authorized and directed to 
utilize the techniques with Janat Gul as necessary.” 1944 On July 22, 2004, Attorney General 
Ashcroft approved the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Janat Gul 
based on ASSET Y’s reporting. 1945 



194,0 Draft memorandum from Georg e Tenet to National Se curity Advisor re Counterterrorist Interrogation 
Techniques, attached to email from: ^^^H^|^|^H^o^ohn Moseman^^EDACTED], [REDACTED], 
Stanley Moskowitz, Scott Muller, John RizzoT^^^^^^^I and subject: Draft Documents 

for Friday’s NSC Meeting; date: June 29, 2004. 

1941 DIRECTOR (022300Z JUL 04) 

1942 The C IA briefing slides further asserted that H debriefings of Janat Gul by im [foreign government] 
m officials were “not working.” (See CIA briefing slides, CIA Request for Guidance Regarding Interrogation 
of Janat Gul, July 2, 2004). National Security Advisor Rice later stated in a letter to the CIA Director that “CIA 
briefers informed us that Gul likely has information about preelection terrorist attacks against the United States as a 
result of Gul’s close ties to individuals involved in these alleged plots.” See July 6, 2004, Memorandum from 
Condoleezza Rice, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, to the Honorable George Tenet, Director 
of Central Intelligence, re Janat Gul. 

1943 According to handwritten notes of the briefing, CIA briefers described Janat Gul as “senior AQ” and a “key 
facilitator” with “proximity” to a suspected pre-election plot. Committee records indicate that CIA briefers told the 
chairman and vice chairman that, given the pre-election threat, it was “incumbent” on the CIA to “review [the] need 
for ElTs,” following the suspension of “EITs.” (See Handwritten notes of Andrew Johnson (DTS #2009-2077)U3IA 
notes (DT S #2009-2024 pp. 92-95); CIA notes (DTS #2009-2024, pp. 110-121).) ■■■■CTC Legal ■■ 
^mil later wrote that the “only reason” for the chairman and vice chairman briefing on Janat Gul was the 
“potential gain for us” as “the vehicle for briefing the committees on our need for re newed legal and policy support 
for the CT detention and interrogation program.” See email from: HHIHHIi’ to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: 
Priority: congressional notification on Janat Gul; date: July 29, 2004. 

1944 July 29, 2004, Memorandum for the Record from CIA General Counsel Scott Muller re Principals Meeting 
relating to Janat Gul on 20 July 2004. 

1945 Letter from Attorney General Ashcroft to Acting DCI McLaughlin, July 22, 2004 (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 4). 

Attorney General Ashcroft, who attended the July 2, 2004, meeting, had opined earlier on the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against Janat Gul. See letter from Assistant Attorney General Ashcroft to 
General Counsel Muller, July 7, 2004 (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 3); July 2, 2004, CIA Memorandum re Meeting with 
National Security Advisor Rice in the White House Situation Room, Friday 2 July re Interrogations and Detainee 
Janat Gul; July 6, 2004, Memorandum from Condoleezza Rice, Assistant to the President for National Secu rity 
Affairs to George Tenet, Director of Central I ntelligence re Ja nat Gul; Memorandum from ||mil||^liiH> to Jose 
Rodriguez, John P. Mudd, m|||m|, [REDACTED], re standard interrogation techniques 

- DOJ limits, July 2, 2004. 




Page 345 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Janat Gul was rendered to CIA custody on July 2004. 1946 On 
August 2, 2004, Janat Gul denied knowledge of any imminent threats against the United States 
homeland. Gul’s denial was deemed a “strong resistance posture” by CIA detention site 
personnel. 1947 Janat Gul was then subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from 
August 3, 2004, to August 10, 2004, and then again from August 21, 2004, to August 25, 

2004. 1948 



On August 19, 2004, CIA personnel wrote that the interrogation 
“team does not believe [Gul] is withholding imminent threat information.” 1949 On August 25, 
2004, CIA interrogators sent a cable to CIA Headquarters stating that Janat Gul “may not possess 
all that [the CIA] believes him to know.” The interrogators added that the interrogation “team 
maintains a degree of caution in some areas, as many issues linking [Gul] to al-Qaida are derived 
from single source reporting,” a reference to the CIA source, ASSET Y. 1950 



That same day, August 25, 2004, the CIA’s associate general 
counsel provided a letter to the DOJ seeking approval to use additional CIA enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Janat Gul: dietary manipulation, nudity, water dousing, and the 
abdominal slap. The letter asserted that Janat Gul had information concerning “imminent threats 
to the United States” and “information that might assist in locating senior al-Qa’ida operatives 
whose removal from the battlefield could severely disrupt planned terrorist attacks against the 
United States.” The letter stated: 



“In addition, CIA understands that bef ore his ca pture , Gul had been working to 
facilitate a direct meeting between the CIA source reporting 

on the pre-election threat [ASSET Y] and Abu Faraj himself; Gul had arranged 
a previous meeting between [ASSET Y| and al-Qa’ida finance chief Shaykh 
Sa’id at which elements of the pre-election threat were discussed.” 1951 



The letter from the CIA’s associate general counsel asserted that 
Janat Gul’s “resistance increases when questioned about matters that may connect him to al- 
Qa’ida or evidence he has direct knowledge of operational terrorist activities.” 1952 The letter 
stated that the CIA sought approval to add four enhanced interrogation techniques to Janat Gul’s 




iSeeVolume II and III for additional information. 

1 574 04 ). Notwithstanding this assessment, on August 21 , 2004 , a cable from CIA 

Headquarters stated that Janat Gul “is believed to possess information about risks to the citizens of the United States 
or other nations,” that the “use of enhanced techniques is appropriate in order to obtain that information,” and that 
CIA Headquarters was therefore ap proving the resumed use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against 
Janat Gul. See HEADQUARTERSj|0| 04 ). 

1950 1622 (■■■Wwr_ 

1951 August 25 , 2004 , Letter from|mi|^m, Associate General Counsel, to Dan Levin, Acting Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of LegaK!ounseUDTS # 2009 - 1809 , Tab 10 ). 

1952 August 25 , 2004 Letter from Associate General Counsel, to Dan Levin, Acting Assistant 

Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel (DTS # 2009 - 1809 , Tab 10 ). 

m i 1 1 iii i im mu 

Page 346 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T // 



//N O F Q RN 



interrogation plan “in order to reduce markedly Gul’s strong resistance posture and provide an 
opportunity for the interrogation team to obtain his cooperation.” 1953 On August 26, 2004, 

Acting Assistant Attorney General Dan Levin informed CIA Acting General Counsel Rizzo that 
the use of the four additional enhanced interrogation techniques did not violate any U.S. statutes, 
the U.S. Constitution, or U.S. treaty obligations. Levin’s letter stated that “[w]e understand that 
[Janat] Gul is a high-value al Qaeda operative who is believed to possess information concerning 
an imminent terrorist threat to the United States.” 1954 



On August 27, 2004, Gul’s CIA interrogators reported that “in 
terms of overt indications of resistance, [Gul’s] overall resistance is currently judged to be 
minimal.” 1955 Nonetheless, on August 31, 2004, the CIA interrogators asked CIA Headquarters 
to approve an extension of all CIA enhanced interrogation techniques against Janat Gul. 1956 The 
CIA’s associate general counsel objected, writing: 



“In the end, its [sic] going to be an operational call. I just want to be sure that 
the record is clear that we’re not acting precipitously and are taking into 
consideration everything we’re learning about this guy. We open ourselves up 
to possible criminal liability if we misuse the interrogation techniques. I 
reflect again on the cable or cables from the interrogation team that opines that 
physical EITs (facial slap, walling, etc.) do not work on him. I would strongly 
encourage, then, HQS not to approval [sic] the use of physical interrogation 
techniques because if they don’t work, then our motives are questionable. If 
our motives might be questioned, then we get ourselves in trouble.” 1957 

Despite these concerns, on September 3, 2004, CIA Headquarters 
released a cable extending approval for sleep deprivation for 30 days. CIA records indicate, 
however, that Gul was not subjected to sleep deprivation, or any other enhanced interrogation 
technique, following this approval. 1958 

On September 7, 2004, more than a month after Janat Gul was 
rendered to CIA custody, a CIA officer who had observed the interrogations of Gul prepared a 
memorandum for the leadership of the CIA’s Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations Group, 
stating: 



“The definition of an HVD has probably become blurred over the past year as 
[CIA] began to render a higher number of MVDs [medium value detainees], 
but [Janat Gul] would not be considered an HVD when compared to Abu 



1953 August 25, 2004 Letter from Associate General Counsel, to Dan Levin, Acting Assistant 

Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel (DTS #2009-1809, Tab 10). 

1954 Letter to John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, CIA; from Daniel Levin, Acting Assistant Attorney General, 



Au gust 26, 2004 (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 6). 

1631 (271859Z AUG 04) 

1956 1650C3U620ZAUG 04)_ 

1957 See email fro m: to: 

mmmm [REDACTED], and [REDACTED]; subject: “Req to extend authorization to use EITs”; date; 
September 1 , 2004. 

1958 HEADQUARTERS ■■ (032155Z SEP 04) 

llll I I III I I llll Mill I 



Page 347 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



Zubaydah, KSM, and similar level HVDs. [Janat Gul] should likewise not be 
considered an operational planner or even an operator. It is very likely that 
[Janat Gul] came into contact with operational information, but we lack 
credible information that ties him to pre-election threat information or direct 
operational planning against the United States, at home or abroad. Likewise, 
we lack any substantive information that connects [Janat Gul] to UBL, 
Zawahiri, and Abu Faraj Al-Libi.” 1959 



On September 16, 2004, CIA detention site personnel wrote that 
Janat Gul’s reporting directly contradicted information from ASSET Y from March 2004, and 
stated that, “[m]uch of our derogatory information on [Gul] came from [ASSET Y] reporting, as 
did much of our pre-election threat information.” 1960 



On September 17, 2004, following the reports about the 
discrepancies between the comments made by Janat Gul and ASSET Y, as well as similar denials 
from Sharif al-Masri, who was in foreign government custody, the CIA undertook a 
counterintelligence review of ASSET Y to assess the validity of ASSET Y’s reporting. 1961 

c ) On October 1^004^nd October |, 2004, CIA officers provided a 
assessment of ASSET Y. That assessment indicated that ASSET Y was 

deceptive in response to questions regarding his alleged meeting with a senior al-Qa’ida official, 
Shaykh Sa’id, at which ASSET Y claimed to have learned about the pre-election threat. ASSET 
Y then admitted to having fabricated the information about the meeting. 1962 




(TS//|^HH^H//NF) Despite the recantation of reporting from ASSET Y, officers from 
the CIA’s ALEC Station continued to assess that Janat Gul “was one of the highest-ranking 
facilitators in Pakistan with long-standing access to senior leaders in al-Qa’ ida” and other 



groups . u J This assessment was not shared by CIA personnel involved in Gul’s interrogation. 
On November 10, 2004, the CIA’s chief of Base at DETENTION SITE BLACK, the CIA 
detention site hosting Gul, wrote that the words used by ALEC Station to describe Janat Gul: 



1959 Rather than a “high value detainee,” the memo characterized Janat Gul as a “senior facilitator.” The CIA officer 
concluded that Gul was likely “not dir ectly included in operational planning and ope rations.” See September 7, 



2004, CIA Document EYES ONLY - 



I960 



|, written by 



1 1706 (161749Z SEP 04). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “Janat Gul’s claim that 
[ASSET Y] never met the al-Qa’ida finance chief — who [ASSET Y] said told him about the pre-election threat — 
was vital to CIA’s assessment and handlin g of the cas e. CIA officers assessed Gul was cooperating during his 
interrogations by that time, leading CIA tof[|m [ASSET Y] on the meeting and the plot, which he ultimately 
recanted.” As described earlier, CIA records indicate that Janat Gul denied knowledge of any imminent threats 
against the United States homeland, which had been reported by ASSET Y, prior to the use of the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interro gation techniq ues a gainst Gul. At t he time, Gul’s denial was deemed a “strong resistance posture” 
by the CIA. See 
1961 HEADQUARTERS 



1962 




1411 ( 



04); 

The cable states: 




on the question 



of meeting Sa’id, [ASSET Y] quickly confessed to [the CIA officer] that he had fabricated his meeting and blamed 
pressure from his handling [CIA] officer to produce leads as the catalyst for his lies.” ASSET Y continued to assert 
that he discussed the pre-election threat with Janat Gul, who, as noted, had denied to CIA interrogators that he had 
any knowledge of imminent threats to the United States. 



1963 



ALEC 



(092126Z NOV 04) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 348 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



. .fly in the face of what is now a rather long history of debriefings which, 1 
would assert, paint a very different picture of him. While [Janat Gul] was 
certainly a facilitator, describing him as ‘highest-ranking’ gives him a stature 
which is undeserved, overblown and misleading. Stating that he had ‘long 
standing access to senior leaders in al-Qa’ida’ is simply wrong. ... To put it 
simply, [Janat Gul] is not the man we thought he was. While he no doubt had 
associations and interactions with people of interest, [Janat Gul] is not the 
pivotal figure our pre-detention descriptions of him suggest. We do a 
disservice to ourselves, the mission and even [Janat Gul] by allowing 
misperceptions of this man to persist.” 1964 

On November 22, 2004, a CIA officer noted the discrepancy 
between the CIA’s description of Janat Gul as a “potential source of intelligence information 
regarding an attack by al-Qa’ida” in a draft OLC memorandum and the current assessment of 
Janat Gul. 1965 In an email, the CI A officer indicated that he had spoken to the CIA’s associate 
general counsel, who j n f ormec i him that “the state of our knowledge about 

Gul had evolved since he was captured.” The email noted that, “[a]t first, we believed he had 
attack information of a more imminent nature,” b ut “[n]ow it appears that he does not have such 
information.” The email indicated that HIH wou ld talk t0 personnel at OLC about the issue 
to “[amend] the draft opinion to reflect the state of our knowledge.” 1966 The OLC memorandum 
was not updated. 

On December 19, 2004, CIA detention site personnel wrote again 
that Janat Gul was “not/not the man [CIA Headquarters] made him out to be,” and that “[h]e is a 
very simple man who, no doubt, did a capable job as a facilitator but he is not the link to senior 
AQ leaders that [CIA Headquarters] said he was/is.” 1967 



1964 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 
subject: re ALEC |^HB^ate^ovember 10^004 

1965 See email to: m 

November 22, 2004, at 8:25 AM. 

I; to: 



|; subject: re Gul and 
|; subject: re Gul and 




Report; date: 
Report; date: 



1966 See email from: 

November 22, 2004, at 8:25 AM. 

1967 CIA “Comments on Detainees,” December 19, 2004, notes from DETENTION SITE BLACK. In April 2005, 
the chief of Base where Janat Gul was held emailed that “[Janat Gul] was never the person we thought he was. He 
is not the senior Al-Qa’ida facilitator that he has been labeled. He’s a rather poorly educated village man with a 
very simple outlook on life. He’s also quite lazy and it’s the combination of his background and lack of initiative 
that got him in trouble. He was looking to make some easy money for little work and he was easily persuaded to 
move people and run errands for folks on our target list. While he openly admits that he helped move people, it’s 
pretty well established that the vast majority of his work involved seeking medical care and providing housing for 
family members of Tahir Jan’s Uzbek organization. There simply is no ‘smoking gun’ that we can refer to that 
would justify our continued holding of [Janat Gul] at a site such as [DETENTION SITE BLACK]. It should be 
noted, however, that [Janat Gul] has made what I think is great progress. He fingered [ASSET Y] as a fabricator 
and has been generally responsive to requirements though, it must be said, he never had access to most of the 
information we seek from him.” See email from: [REDACTED] (COB DETENTION SITE BLACK); to: 



I; cc: 



; subject: re | 



2005. 



TOP SECRET/, 




|; date: April 30, 



/NOFORN 



Page 349 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



On April 6, 2005, as the OLC approached completion of its 
analysis of the legality of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the OLC asked the CIA 
about the interrogation of Gul using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, specifically, 
“what [the CIA] got from Janat Gul, was it valuable, [and] did it help anything....” 1968 The C IA 
dicUiotimmediately respond to this request and the CIA’s Associate General Counsel HU 
HHIH noted that OLC personnel had “taken to calling [him] daily” for information. 1969 On 
April 14, 2005, a CIA officer emailed talking points stating that: 

“Pakistan-based facilitator Janat Gul’s most significant reporting helped us 
validate a CIA asset who was providing information about the 2004 pre- 
election threat. The asset claimed that Gul had arranged a meeting between 
himself and al-Qa’ida’s chief of finance, Shaykh Sa’id, a claim that Gul 
vehemently denied. 

Gul’s reporting was later matched with information obtained from Sharif al- 
Masr^n^Abu Talha, captured after Gul. With this reporting in hand, CIA 
Wmtm asse L who subsequently admitted to fabricating his reporting 
about the meeting.” 1970 



On May 10, 2005, the OLC issued a formal memorandum that 
included a discussion of the legality of the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
against Janat Gul. 1971 Citing information provided in the CIA’s August 25, 2004, letter, the OLC 
memorandum stated: 



“You asked for our advice concerning these interrogation techniques in 
connection with their use on a specific high value al Qaeda detainee named 
Janat Gul. You informed us that the CIA believed Gul had information about 
al Qaeda’s plans to launch an attack within the United States. According to 
CIA’s information, Gul had extensive connections to various al Qaeda leaders, 
members of the Taliban, and the al-Zarqawi network, and had arranged 
meetings between an associate and al Qaeda’s finance chief to discuss such an 
attack. . . .Our conclusions depend on these assessments.” 1972 



1968 E nla ji f rom: 

[REDACTED]; subject: question s fro m OLC for Art 16 opinion; date: Apri l 6, 2005. 

1969 Email from: 



[REDACTED]; subject: questions from OLC for Art 16 opinion; date: April 12, 2005; email from 




questions from OLC for Art 16 opinion; date: April 14, 2005. 
1970 Email from: 



|, and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: 




, and 



|; subject: response to no. 5 request from 



: OTA’s Detainee Reporting Brief; date: 



April 14, 2005. 

1971 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 
18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al Qaeda 
Detainee. 

1972 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 

Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attome^jeneral^^ May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 

ini ill in i nun 

Page 350 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 




May 30, 2005, the OLC issued a memorandum concluding that 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against CIA detainees did not violate 
Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture. 1973 In the memorandum, Principal Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General Steven G. Bradbury used the example of Janat Gul as a detainee who 
was “representative of the high value detainees on whom enhanced techniques have been, or 
might be, used.” 1974 

Citing information from the CIA’s August 25, 2004, letter, 

Bradbury wrote: 

“the CIA believed [that Janat Gul] had actionable intelligence concerning the 
pre-election threat to the United States... Gul had extensive connections to 
various al Qaeda leaders, members of the Taliban, and the al-Zarqawi network, 
and intelligenc e indicated that ‘Gul had arranged a... meeting between [a 
BBHMHU source] and al-Qa’ida finance chief Shaykh Sa’id at which 
elements of the pre-election threat were discussed.’” 1975 

As noted, the CIA had represented that the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques was necessary for Janat Gul to provide information on an 
imminent threat to the United States, the pre-election threat. As further noted, Gul did not 
provide this information and records indicate that the threat was based on fabricated CIA source 
reporting. When the OLC requested the results of using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques against Janat Gul, the CIA represented that “Gul has provided information that has 
helped the CIA with validating one of its key assets reporting on the pre-election threat.” This 
information was included in the May 30, 2005, OLC memorandum, which also stated that Gul’s 
information “contradicted the asset’s co ntention that G ul met with Shaykh Sa’id,” and that, 
“[a]rmed with Gul’s assertions, the CIA the asset, who then admitted that he had 

lied about the meeting.” 1976 There are no indications in the memorandum that the CIA informed 



18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al Qaeda 
Detainee. 

1973 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees. 

1974 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees. 

1975 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees (brackets in the original). The OLC memorandum also 
cited an “Undated CIA Memo, ‘Janat Gul’ (‘ Jancit Gul Memo’). The OLC also relied on CIA representations that 
Janat Gul’s interrogations “greatly increased the CIA’s understanding of our enemy and its plans.’’ 



1976 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 




Page 35 1 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N Q FORN 



the OLC that CIA officers had concluded that Gul had no information about the pre-election 
threat and had determined that Gul was “not the man we thought he was.” 1977 As noted, after the 
May 30, 2005, OLC memorandum, the CIA continued to represent that the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques allowed the CIA to validate sources. 1978 

8. The Identification and Arrests of Uzhair and Saifullah Paracha 



(TS/s^^^^HU^^^/NF) The CIA represented that information obtained through the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques produced otherwise unavailable intelligence that led 
to the identification and/or arrest of Uzhair Paracha and his father Saifullah Paracha (aka, Sayf 
al-Rahman Paracha). These CIA representations include inaccurate information and omit 
significant material information — specifically a body of intelligence reporting acquired prior to 
CIA detainee reporting that linked the Parachas to al-Qa’ida-related activities. 



CIA representations also credit the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques with the identification of a plot to smuggle explosives into the United 
States involving the Parachas. 1979 CIA records indicate that the plotting was denied by the 
supposed participants, and that at least one senior CIA counterterrorism official questioned the 
plausibility of the explosives smuggling plot given the relative ease of acquiring explosive 
material in the United States. 1980 



The CIA provided information to the CIA Office of Inspector 
General that “EITs (including the water board) have been indispensable to our successes,” and 
stated that the CIA OIG Special Review should have come to the “conclusion that our efforts 
have thwarted attacks and saved lives.” 1981 The CIA further represented to the OIG that KSM 



United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

1977 The OLC relied on CIA representations that Janat Gul had information, but that he withheld it. In describing the 
interrogation process, the OLC stated that Janat Gill’s resistance increased as questioning moved to his “‘knowledge 
of operational terrorist activities.’” The OLC also wrote that “Gul apparently feigned memory problems (which CIA 
psychologists ruled out through intelligence and memory tests) in order to avoid answering questions.” The OLC 
further conveyed that the “CIA believes that Janat Gul continues to downplay his knowledge.” See Memorandum 
for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, 

Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United 
States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be Used in 
the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees. 

1978 As described elsewhere, on April 21, 2009, a CIA spokesperson confirmed the accuracy of the information in 
the OLC memorandum in response to the partial declassification of this memorandum and others. 

1979 Among other documents, see Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for 
Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Program” (2003-71 23 -IG); date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of 
CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

1980 See details in the intelligence chronology in Volume II. 

1981 CIA memorandum to the CIA Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations, 



dated February 27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program’ (2003-7123-IG),” Attachment, “Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogation Activities,” dated February 2 4, 2004. 

mi" mi in mi mu i 



Page 352 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET - // 



//NQF Q RN 



“provided information that helped lead to the arrest of. . . Uzair Paracha, a smuggler,” 1982 and that 
“as a result of the lawful use of EITs”: 



“KSM identified a mechanism for al-Qa’ida to smuggle explosives into the US 
via a Pakistani businessman and textile merchant who shipped his material to 
the US. The businessman had agreed to use this method to help al-Qa’ida 
smuggle in explosives for follow-on attacks to 9/1 1.” 1983 

Similarly, on July 29, 2003, the CIA made a presentation to a 
select group of National Security Council principals, including Vice President Cheney, seeking 
policy reaffirmation of the CIA interrogation program. The CIA briefing materials state that “the 
use of the [CIA interrogation] techniques has produced significant results,” and warned that 
“[t]ermination of this [CIA] program will result in loss of life, possibly extensive.” The CIA 
conveyed that “[m]ajor threats were countered and attacks averted,” and under a briefing slide 
entitled “RESULTS: MAJOR THREAT INFO,” represented that information obtained from 
KSM after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques led to the “identification” of 
Saifullah Paracha. 1984 



A widely disseminated CIA Intelligence Assessment, entitled 
“Detainee Reporting Pivotal for the War Against Al-Qa’ida,” that was described in internal CIA 
emails as being “put together using past assessments” and initially intended for the White House 
only, with “marching orders” to “throw everything in it,” 1985 states: 



“Since 11 September 2001, detainee reporting has become a crucial pillar of 
US counterterrorism efforts, aiding... operations to capture additional 
terrorists, helping to thwart terrorist plots... KSM’s revelation in March 2003 



1982 



, Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Deputy Chief, Counterterrorist Center 
ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003. These representations were included in the final, and now declassified Special 
Review of the Inspector General, which states that KSM “provided information that helped lead to the arrests of 
terrorists including Sayfullah Paracha and his son Uzair, businessmen whom Khalid Shaykh Muhammad planned to 
use to smuggle explosives in New York.” ( See CIA Inspector General Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Activities (September 2001 - October 2003) (2003-71 23 -IG), 7 May 2004). The statements in the 
Special Review regarding the purported effectiveness of the program, including the reference to the Parachas, were 
cited by the Office of Legal Counsel in its analysis of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. See 
Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May Be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees, pp. 10-11, citing IG Special Review, pp. 85-91. 



1983 Email from: 



cc: 



| [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|; subject: re Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: February 9, 2004. Memorandum for: 
Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG 
Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7123-IG); date: February 27, 2004; 
attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Activities. 

1984 CIA memorandum for the Record, “Review of Interrogation Program on 29 July 2003,” prepared by CIA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, dated August 5, 2003; briefing slides entitled, “CM Interrogation Program, ” dated 
July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials. 

1985 See email from: [REDACTED]; to: multiple addresses; subject: “Draft of 1A on ‘Detainee Reporting Pivotal to 
the War on Terrorism’”; date: May 16, 2005, at 2:08 PM. 

i ni 1 1 iii i 

Page 353 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



that he was plotting with Sayf al-Rahman Paracha — who also used the name 
Saifullah al-Rahman Paracha — to smuggle explosives into the United States 
for a planned attack in New York prompted the FBI to investigate Paracha ’s 
business ties in the United States .” 1986 

CIA representations related to the “identification” of the Parachas 
and/or the arrest of Uzair Paracha — as well as the identification of an explosives smuggling 
plot — omit significant information acquired by the Intelligence Community prior to any 
reporting from CIA detainees. Specifically, prior to KSM’s reporting, the Intelligence 
Community had already collected and acted upon significant information related to the Paracha 
family’s connections to al-Qa’ida and international terrorism: 

• Information on Saifullah Paracha was found in documents seized during a March 28, 
2002, raid against al-Qa’ida targets associated with Hassan Ghul, which resulted in the 
capture of Abu Zubaydah. The documents identified “Saifullah Piracha” (the spelling 
found in the document seized during the raid) and phone numbers, which would be 
associated with his Karachi-based business. International Merchandise Pvt Ltd, as early 
as April 2002. An address associated with the business was also identified. 1987 

• The name “Saifullah Piracha” was provided to Pakistani officials by the CIA in 
December 2002. The CIA wrote: “Information below leads us to believe that the 
following individual and phone numbers may have a connection to al-Qa’ida and 
international terrorism.... We request your assistance in investigating this individual to 
determine if he is involved in terrorist activity.” The request included three phone 
numbers found in the documents seized on March 28, 2002, one of which was associated 
with Saifullah Paracha’ s Karachi-based company, International Merchandise Pvt Ltd. 1988 

• In April 2002, the FBI opened an investigation on another at a 

New York-based business associated with Saifullah Paracha. During the course of the 
investigation, the FBI interviewed an employer at a New York address and a cquired 
additional information on the business and the Parachas. business 

card, identifying him as an employee of International Merchandise Limited, was found 
among documents seized during the April 2002 Karachi raid. 1989 



1986 p a jj cs added. CIA Intelligence Assessment, “Detainee Reporting Pivotal for the War Against Al-Qa’ida,” June 
2005, which CIA records indicate was provided to White House officials on June 1, 2005. The Intelligence 
Assessment at the SECRET//NOFORN classification level was more broadly disseminated on June 3, 2005. On 
March 31 , 2009, former Vice President Cheney requested the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which 
was publicly rel eased wi th redactions on August 24, 2009. 

1987 DIRECTOR (221835Z APR 02); ALEC ■■ (222235Z DEC 02); DIRECTOR ■■ (221835Z 

APR 02) 

1988 ALEC (222235Z DEC 02) 

1989 pgj WASHINGTON DC (271623Z MAR 03); ALEC (191630Z MAY 03) (cables explaining previous 

FBI investigative action on Paracha). On March 28, 2003, the FBI would return to the same employer and the same 
address, leading to the apprehension of Uzhair Paracha, who would voluntarily provide significant reporting to the 



FBI. 



TOP SECRET// 



fl NOFORN 



Page 354 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET - // 



//NOFORN 



• Months later, financial documents seized during the September 11, 2002, raids that 
resulted in the capture of Ramzi bin al-Shibh identified an email address attributed to 
International Merchandise Pvt Ltd., with the same contact — Saifullah A. Paracha — as 
well as the same address and phone number as the business identified after the March 
2002 raid. 1990 

• Based on the information obtained during the September 2002 raids, the CIA informed 
the FBI, the NS A, and the Department of Treasury that they suspected “Saifullah 
Paracha” was engaged in terrorist financing activities, specifically for al-Qa’ida. The 
cable included detailed information on Saifullah Paracha and International Merchandise 
Pvt Ltd in Karachi, and noted the CIA’s ongoing interest in, and analysis of, the 
information. 1991 

• FBI investigative activity of terrorism subject Iyman Faris found that Faris was linked to 
Paracha Imports via his Ohio-based housemates. 1992 

• Majid Khan, who was in foreign government custody, provided reporting that “Uzhair” 
ran the New York branch of his father’s Karachi-based import-export business. 
According to the reporting, Uzhair was assisting Majid Khan and Ammar al-Baluchi in 
their efforts to resettle Majid Khan in the United States for terrorism-related purposes. 
Khan provided a detailed physical description of both Uzhair and his father. 1993 

KSM was captured on March 1, 2003. On March |, 2003, KSM 
was rendered to CIA custody and immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 1994 A CIA interrogation report from March 24, 2003, states that during the 
afternoon, KSM continued to be subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
including the waterboard, for failing to provide information on operations in the United States 
and for having “lied about poison and biological warfare programs.” 1995 That evening, KSM’s 
interrogators received reports on information being provided by Majid Khan, 1996 who was in 
foreign government custody and being interviewed by FBI special agents and foreign 
government officers. The information included details on a U.S. -based individual associated 
with al-Qa’ida named Uzhair. According to Khan, this Uzhair ran the New York branch of his 



See also 
See also 




1993 



1990 CIA (0401 23Z DEC 02)/ 

1991 CIA^^H (0401 23Z DEC 02)/ 
ALEC ^^^222235Z DEC 02). 

1992 See FBI inv estigati ve file 
““ HIM 13890 



The cable describing Majid Khan’s foreign government interrogation 
also included Khan’s reporting on how Ammar al-Baluchi intended to have Uzhair use Majid Khan’s credit card to 
create the appearance that Majid Khan was already in the United States. As described in the full Committee Study, 
the cable further detailed Khan’s two meetings with Uzhair and his father, and a subsequent phone call with Uzhair 
(followi ng Uzhair ’ s return to the United States ), all of wh ich were facilitated by Ammar al-Baluchi. 

10972 (241122Z MAR 03); and the KSM detainee review 




10972 (241122Z MAR 03) 



10983 (24232 1Z MAR 03); 



1994 See 

in Volume III. 

1995 10983 (24232 1Z MAR 03); 

1996 Majid Khan was detained in Pakistani on March 5, 2003. 

13659 (050459Z MAR 03); DmECTOR^^H(050459ZMAR03). 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi him i 

Page 355 of 499 



See 



13658 (0503 18Z MAR 03); 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



father’s Karachi-based import-export business. 1997 CIA cables describe KSM as being “boxed 
in” by reporting from Majid Khan 1998 before providing the following information on the 
Parachas and a smuggling plot: 



• KSM corroborated reporting from Majid Khan that Ammar al-Baluchi and Majid Khan 
approached Uzhair Paracha for assistance in resettling Majid Khan in the United 
States. 1999 



• KSM stated that he was close to Uzhair’ s father, Sayf al-Rahman Paracha, who provided 
assistance through his business and by helping to find safe houses in Karachi. 2000 

• KSM claimed that Ammar al-Baluchi and Majid Khan approached Sayf al-Rahman 
Paracha with a plan to use Sayf al-Rahman Paracha’ s textile business to smuggle 
explosives into the United States. KSM stated that Paracha agreed to this plan and was 
arranging the details with Ammar al-Baluchi and Majid Khan at the time of his (KSM’s) 
capture. 2001 A later CIA cable provided additional background, stating: “KSM did not 
volunteer [the explosives plot] information on Paracha. He provided this reporting only 
when confronted with details on his role and other information on the plot, which had 
been provided by detainee Majid Khan,” who was in foreign government custody. 2002 

According to CIA records, on March 28, 2003, at a FBI field 
office, Uzhair Paracha provided significant information to interviewing FBI special agents on his 
father’s links to al-Qa’ida and his own efforts to assist Majid Khan’s reentry to the United States. 
Uzhair denied knowing anything about an explosives smuggling plot. 2003 

On April 29, 2003, Ammar al-Baluchi was detained by Pakistani 
authorities as a result of reporting unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 
Records indicate Ammar al-Baluchi provided significant information prior to being transferred to 
CIA custody. 2004 On May 2003, Ammar al-Baluchi was rendered to CIA custody and 



13890 



■■■ 10984 (24235 1Z MAR 03) 

10983 (242321Z MAR 03). The CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts that “[reporting from 

interrogations of KSM was directly and uniquely responsible for the arrests of Saifullah Paracha and his son Uzhair 
Paracha.” The CIA Response also asserts that Majid Khan’s reporting “was disseminated just after KSM provided 
the information that allowed us to identify Paracha” (emphasis in the original). This is inaccurate. The cable 
describing KSM’s interrogation specifically references the cable describing Majid Khan’s detailed reporting from 
interrogations in foreign government custody and how KSM was “boxed in” by the information provide by Majid 
Khan. 

1 09X4 (24235 1Z MAR 03), disseminated as 

10984 (24235 1Z MAR 03), disseminated as 
10984 (24235 1Z MAR 03), disseminated as 

(052230Z MAY 03) 

(012248Z APR 03) 

2004 See section of this summary on the Karachi Plots, including | 

(142334Z MAY 03). A CIA cable describes a CIA officers meeting with the foreign government officer 
who used rapport-building techniques to acquire information from Ammar al-Baluchi. The officer stated that 
Ammar al-Baluchi was “more chatty” than Khallad bin Attash (who was also in foreign government custody at the 
time), and that Ammar “acknowledged pl ans to attack U.S. Consulate offici als at the airport, the Consul General’s 
Residence and the Consulate itself.” See H|^^Hl9647^^^^H^^H04). 

nil I I III I 





14291 (021645Z MAY 03) and ALEC 



Page 356 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2005 The CIA stopped 
using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Ammar al-Baluchi on May 20, 2003. 2006 
A June 18, 2003, cable states that Ammar al-Baluchi denied that he and Sayf al-Rahman Paracha 
agreed to smuggle explosives into the United States. Ammar al-Baluchi stated he only asked 
Sayf al-Rahman Paracha questions and made inquiries about how explosives shipping could be 
done. Ammar al-Baluchi maintained that he did not take any action based on the discussion. 2007 

) On July 5, 2003, Saifullah Paracha was detained in |[|||HH, in an 
operation orchestrated by the FBI. 2008 Shortly thereafter, Saifullah Paracha was rendered to U.S. 
military custody at Bagram Air Force Base. 2009 At Bagram, Saifullah Paracha was questioned by 
an FBI special agent. 2010 A CIA cable from July 17, 2003, relays that Saifullah Paracha stated 
that Ammar al-Baluchi had asked if he knew a forwarding agent who could ship garments and 
“materials” to Europe, which Saifullah Paracha inferred were either explosives or chemicals. 
Paracha stated he had no information to provide to Ammar al-Baluchi on this topic and that no 
further action was taken on the matter. 2011 

) With regards to the explosives smuggling reporting, a senior CIA 
counterterrorism official commented: 

“again, another ksm op worthy of the lamentable knuckleheads... why 
‘smuggle’ in explosives when you can get them here? neither fertilizer for 
bombs or regular explosives are that hard to come by. ramzi yousef came to 



2005 Ammar al-B aluchi was detained in PakistanonApril29, 2003, and transferred to Cl^custody on Ma 
See 14259 45028 14282 






, 2003. 




(See interview by Office of the Inspector General, August 5, 2003). The 

CIA originally sought to take direct custodyofSaifullah Paracha^Or^Ma^>^003, CTC’s chief of operations, 
sent an email to ^m|CTC Legal, and CTC attorney Bll 

, with a proposal for the CIA to detain Saifullah Paracha and interrogate him using the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, writing: “we MUST have paracha arrested without delay and transferred to cia custody for 
interrogation using enhanced measures, i understand that paracha’s us person status makes this difficult, but this is 
dynamite and we have t^uov^owar^witli alacrit^whaUlo you neecH(^lc^hat^vhaUlo we need to do that?” 
See CIA document for: from: date: 6 May 

According to CIA r ecords noted above, Saifullah Paracha’s eventual capture and r endition to U.S. military custody 
was complicated by According to emails within CTC 

Legal, Paracha was 



86058 

2oi° E ma j] from: to: Hm, [REDACTED]; subject: For coordination - DCI Highlight on 

Paracha; date: July 7, 2003, at 11:10 AM; email from: to: cc: [REDACTED]; 

subject: Re: For coordination - DCI Highlight on Paracha; date: July 7, 2003, at 11:18:39 AM. 

2011 13588 (171505Z JUL 03) 



Page 357 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



conus with a suitcase and hundred bucks and got everything he needed right 
here, this may be true, but it just seems damn odd to me.” 2012 

9. Critical Intelligence Alerting the CIA to Jajfar al-Tayyar 



The CIA made repeated claims that the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques resulted in “key intelligence” from Abu Zubaydah and KSM on an 
operative named Jaffar al-Tayyar, 2013 later identified as Adnan el-Shukrijumah. 2014 These CIA 
representations frequently asserted that information obtained from KSM after the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques resulted in an FBI investigation that prompted al- 
Tayyar to flee the United States. These representations were inaccurate. KSM was captured on 
March 1, 2003. Jaffar al-Tayyar departed the United States in May 2001. 2015 



CIA representations also omitted key contextual facts, including 
that: (1) the Intelligence Community was interested in the Florida-based Adnan el-Shukrijumah 
prior to the detention of the CIA’s first detainee; 2016 (2) CIA detainee Abu Zubaydah provided a 
description and information on a KSM associate named Jaffar al-Tayyar to FBI special agents in 



subject: see highlight: again, another ksm op worthy of the lamentable; date: March 25, 2003, at 

6:29:08 AM. 

2013 Also known as (aka) Adnan Gulshair Muhammad el-Shukrijumah, Jafaar al-Tayyar, and Abu Jafar al-Tayer. 
Spelling used throughout the Committee Study reflects, to the extent possible, the spelling found within intelligence 
records. 

2014 CIAMemorand^ for Ste ve Bradbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, 

from | ” 



HH Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA 

Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” See also CIA classified Statement for the Record, Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency, 12 
April 2007 (DTS #2007-1563). See also CIA Intelligence Assessment, “Detainee Reporting Pivotal for the War 
Against Al-Qa’ida,” June 2005, which CIA records indicate was provided to White House officials on June l , 2005. 
The Intelligence Assessment at the SECRET//NOFORN level was more broadly disseminated on June 3, 2005. On 
March 31, 2009, fonner Vice President Cheney requested the declassification of this Intelligence Assessment, which 
was publicly released with redactions on August 24, 2009. See also CIA graphic attachment to several CIA 
briefings on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, entitled, “Key Intelligence and Reporting Derived from 
Abu Zubaydah and Khalid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM).” See also CIA briefing documents for Leon Panetta 
entitled, “Tab 9: DCIA Briefing on RDI Program- 18FEB.2009.” 

2015 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “there were cases in which we either made a factual error or used 
imprecise language, but these mistakes were not central to our representations and none invalidates our assessment 
that detainee reporting provided key intelligence on this important terrorist.” As one of two examples, the CIA’s 
June 2013 Response acknowledges that the “[CIA] incorrectly stated al-Tayyar fled the United States in response to 
the FBI investigation, although he had in fact already departed the United States by this time.” The Committee 
found that this inaccurate statement was central to the CIA’s representations. The CIA asserted that “Ja’far al- 
Tayyar” fled the United States because of KSM’s reporting after the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques in the context of representations that the use of the techniques “has been a key reason why al-Qa’ida has 

failed to launch a spectacular attack in the West.” 

2016 



ALEC (210218Z MAR 03). Extensive open source records include “Broward Man Sought as Terror 

Suspect,” Miami Herald, dated March 21, 2003; “Pursuit of al-Qaeda keeps coming back to Fla.,” USA Today, dated 
June 15, 2003; and “A Hunt for ‘The Pilot,”’ U.S. News and World Report, dated March 30, 2003. For context, see 
also United States District Court Southern District Florida, Case No. 02-60096, United States of America v. Imran 
Mandhai and Shueyb Mossa Jokhan, filed May 16, 2002, 

TOP SECRE TZ/MimB^^BBM^^^R^ 

Page 358 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET// 



//NQF O R N 



May 2002, prior to being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques; 2017 (3) CIA 
personnel distrusted KSM’s reporting on Jaffar al-Tayyar — stating that KSM fabricated 
information and had inserted al-Tayyar “into practically every story, each time with a different 
role”; 2018 (4) other CIA detainee reporting differed from KSM’s reporting in significant 
ways; 2019 and (5) CIA records indicate that KSM did not identify al-Tayyar’ s true name and that 
it was Jose Padilla — in military custody and being questioned by the FBI — who provided al- 
Tayyar’ s true name as Adnan el-Shukrijumah. 2020 Finally, the CIA attributed to KSM the 
characterization of al-Tayyar as the “next Mohammed Atta,” despite clarifications from KSM to 
the contrary. 2021 

For example, in a March 2, 2005, CIA memorandum with the 
subject line, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” the CIA 
responded to a request from the Office of Legal Counsel “for the intelligence the Agency 
obtained from detainees who, before their interrogations, were not providing any information of 
intelligence [value].” Under a section entitled, “Results,” the CIA stated: 

“CIA’s use of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of a 
comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist 
plots, capture additional terrorists, and collect a high volume of critical 
intelligence on al-Qa’ida. We believe that intelligence acquired from these 
interrogations has been a key reason why al-Qa’ida has failed to launch a 
spectacular attack in the West since 1 1 September 2001. Key intelligence 



2017 

2018 I 



See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III and 
10884 (182140Z MAR 03); email from: 




; to [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; 



subject: Re: Reissue/Correction: CT: Comments on Khalid Shaykh Muhammad o n imminent threats to U.S. t argets 
in Thailand, Indonesia, and the Uiilipin^^ate^larch 12, 2003, at 9:36:5 7 AM; ^ BHHBHBBHH 42247 
(210357Z JUL 03); email from: ^H^HHH; to: [REDACTED], 

l [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; 
subject: RATHER PROFOUND IMPLICATIONS... Ammar al-Baluchi's Comments on Jaffar al-Tayyar— If Ammar 
is Correct, then KSM Appears to Have a Focused Us on Jaffar in a Extended Deception Scheme— and His Deception 
Capabilities are Not Broken Down ; date: 07/21/03 1 1:24 AM. 

2019 Email from: 



|; to [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: REISSUE/CORRECTION: 
CT: CT: Comments on Khalid Shaykh Muhammad on imminent threats to U.S. targets in Thailand, Indonesia, and 
the Philipines; date: March 12, 2003, at 9:36:57 AM; National Counterterrorism Center, REFLECTIONS, “Ja’far al- 



Tayyar: An Unlikely Al-Qa’ida Operational Threat, 
(210357Z JUL 03); email from: 




22 December 2005; 42247 

; to: [REDACTED],) 

1, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; 
subject: RATHER PROFOUND IMPLICATIONS... Ammar al-Baluchi's Comments on Jaffar al-Tayyar-lf Ammar 
is Correct, then KSM Appears to Have a Focused Us on Jaffar in a Extended Deception Scheme— and His Deception 
Capabilities are Not Broken Down; date: 07/21/03 1 1:24 AM. 

202 ° qa “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” faxed from the CIA to the Department of Justice on 




10741 (100917Z MAR 03); 



April 15, 200 5, at 10:47AM. For KSM’s inability to ident ify name, see \ 
10740 (092308Z MAR 03), disseminated as | 

10787 (130716Z MAR 03); HI 



HI 10863 (171028Z MAR 03). For example, November 6, 2006, 
talking points prepared for a briefing with the President stated that ‘‘KSM described Tayyar as the next Muhammad 
Atta.” See CIA document entitled, “DCIA Talking Points: Waterboard 06 November 2007,” dated November 6, 
2007, with the notation the document was “senttoDCIANov^fMi^rep^^ POTUS meeting.” 

TOP 

Page 359 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



mr,SH I II II I III I I 

collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation 
techniques:” 2022 



The CIA then listed “Jafaar al-Tayyar” as one of 11 examples, 

stating: 



“Jafaar al-Tayyar: Tayyar is an al-Qa’ida operative who was conducting 
casing in the US for KSM prior to 9/11, according to KSM and other HVDs. 
KSM confirmed that he recruited Tayyar — who is still at large — to conduct a 
major operation against US interests. KSM described Tayyar as the next 
Muhammad Atta. Tayyar’ s family is in Florida and we have identified many 
of his extremist contacts. Acting on this information, the FBI quickly 
publicized Tayyar’ s true name and aggressively followed up with his family 
and friends in the Uni ted States, causing Tayyar to flee the Unit ed States. 

anc * we are actively pursuing his capture. 



In January 2009, the CIA compiled a detailed briefing book — and 
CIA Director Hayden produced his own prepared remarks — for a three-hour briefing on the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program for President-elect Obama’s national security 
staff. 2024 Included in the materials was a document entitled, “Key Impacts,” which states: 

“Results : CIA’s use of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques, as 
part of a comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled CIA to disrupt 
terrorist plots, capture additional terrorists, and collect a high volume of critical 
intelligence on al-Qa’ida. We believe that intelligence acquired from these 
interrogations has been a key reason why al-Qa’ida has failed to launch a 
spectacular attack in the West since 1 1 September 2001. Key intelligence 
collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation techniques: 2025 



2022 



Emphasis in original document. CIA Memorandum for Steve Bradbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department 



of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from 



Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject 



“Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 

2023 CIAMemorandum for_Steve Bradbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, 
from BT 



Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 

2024 CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team - “Renditions, Detentions, and Interrogations (RDI)” including 
“Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009.” Referenced materials attached to cover 
memorandum with the title, “D/CIA Conference Room Seating Visit by President-elect Barrack [sic] Obama 
National Security Team Tuesday, 13 January 2009; 8:30 - 1 1:30 a.m.” The briefing book includes the previously 
mentioned “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” dated 15 May 2006, which provided the same 
intelligence claims found in the document of the same name, but dated April 15, 2005. Expected participants 
included “Senator Boren, Mr. McDonough, Mr. Brennan, General Jones, Mr. Craig, Mr. Lippert, Mr. Smith, Senator 



Hagel,” as well as s everal CIA off icials, includin 
[REDACTED], and Legal, 

2025 Emphasis in original. 

3QP SECRET/i 




, John Rizzo, 



7NOFORN 



Page 360 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N Q F Q RN 



. . . Jafaar al-Tavvar : Tayyar is an al-Qa’ida operative who was conducting 
casing in the US for KSM prior to 9/1 1, according to KSM and other HVDs. 
KSM confirmed that he recruited Tayyar — who is still at large — to conduct a 
major operation against US interests. KSM described Tayyar as the next 
Muhammad Atta. Tayyar’ s family is in Florida and we have identified many 
of his extremist contacts. Acting on this information, the FBI quickly 
publicized Tayyar’ s true name and aggressively followed up with his family 
and friends in the Uni ted States, causing Tayyar to flee the Unit ed States. 2026 
and we are actively pursuing his capture. 



Prior to receiving information from the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program, the U.S. Intelligence Community was interested in Adnan el- 
Shukrijumah. According to CIA and open source records, the FBI interviewed the parents of 
Adnan el-Shukrijumah several times between September 2001 and October 2002 concerning 
their son and his suspected contact with a known extremist. The family provided no significant 
information on their son, except to alert the FBI that he had departed the United States circa May 
2001. 2028 

CIA representations that Jaffar al-Tayyar fled the United States in 
2003 in response to an investigation prompted by reporting from KSM were incongruent with 
CIA records at the time of the representations, which indicated that al-Tayyar had already 
relocated to Pakistan. In March 2003, when Jose Padilla identified Jaffar al-Tayyar as Adnan al- 
Shukrijumah, he stated that he had last seen al-Tayyar at a KSM safehouse in Karachi, Pakistan, 
in March 2002. 2029 Other reporting indicated al-Tayyar’ s presence in Pakistan in 2002 and 2003, 
as well. For example, KSM consistently reported that al-Tayyar was not in the United States and 
noted during a 2004 interrogation that al-Tayyar “would not return to the United States because 



2026 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[i]n some of the early representations, we incorrectly stated al- 
Tayyar fled the United States in response to the FBI investigation, although he had in fact already departed the 
United States by this time” (italics added). As noted, this representation was made by the CIA as late as January 
2009, to President-elect Obama’s national security team. 

2027 Emphases in original. CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team - “Renditions, Detentions, and 
Interrogations (RDI)” including “Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009.” Referenced 
materials attached to cover memorandum with the title, “D/CIA Conference Room Seating Visit by President-elect 
Barrack [sic] Obama National Security Team Tuesday, 13 January 2009; 8:30 - 1 1 :30 a.m.” The briefing book 
includes the previously mentioned “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” dated 15 May 2006, which 
provided the same intelligence claims in the document of the same name, but dated April 15, 2005. See “RDI Key 
Impacts.” 

2028 ALEC (210218Z MAR 03). Extensive open source records include “Pursuit of al-Qaeda keeps coming 

back to Fla.,” USA Today, dated June 15, 2003; “Broward Man Sought as Terror Suspect,” Miami Herald, dated 
March 21, 2003; and “A Hunt for ‘The Pilot,”’ U.S. News and World Report, dated March 30, 2003. The FBI 
confirmed for the Committee that Adnan el-Shukrijumah departed the United States in May 2001 . See DTS #2013- 



0391. 

2029 Email from: 



; to: 



I, [REDACTED]; cc: 



subject: Padilla Breaks; date: May 1, 2003, at 08:51 AM; CIA “Briefing Notes on the Valu^HDetainee 
Reporting” faxed from the CIA to the Department of Justice on April 15, 2005, at 10:47AM; ALEC m 
(210218Z MAR 03). 

mi 1 1 m i i mi mm 

Page 361 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



his name was known to U.S. authorities.” 2030 F urther, HHH| 

(TS//BHi^BN^) On May 20, 2002, prior to the initiation of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques — and while being questioned by FBI special agents — CIA detainee Abu 
Zubaydah provided information on “Abu Jafar al-Tayer” in the context of discussing associates 
of KSM. Abu Zubaydah provided a detailed description of “Abu Jafar al-Tayer” and stated that 
he was an English speaker who had studied in the United States. Abu Zubaydah stated that he 
first met “Abu Jafar al-Tayer” in Birmal, Afghanistan, circa January 2002, and that “Abu Jafar 
al-Tayer” was at that time seeking to travel to Pakistan. Abu Zubaydah repeated that “Abu Jafar 
al-Tayer” spoke “very good English” and was “short and stocky with black hair and dark 
skin.” 2032 Abu Zubaydah did not provide significant additional information on Abu Jaffar al- 
Tayyar after the CIA used its enhanced interrogation techniques against him in August 2002. 2033 

(TS/flMil^B^F) On September 11, 2002, Ramzi bin al-Shibh was captured in 
Karachi, Pakistan. 2034 During the capture operation, a letter referencing Jaffar al-Tayyar was 
seized. According to a translation of the letter, it stated “tell an unidentified pilot named Ja’far 
that he should be ready for travel.” 2035 Shortly after his capture, bin al-Shibh was rendered to 
foreign government custody. 2036 In November 2002, while still in foreign government custody, 
bin al-Shibh was questioned on “Ja’far the Pilot” and provided a physical description of 
“Ja’far.” 2037 




(210549Z SEP 04); 24533 (171207Z SEP 04). See also 

|, describing reporting on Jaffar al-Tayyar from the interrogation of Amraar al- 



Baluchi in foreign government custod 

2031 1 | 





and Federal Bureau of Investigation documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee 
Zayn A1 Abideen Abu Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate Select Committee on Intel ligence by c over letter dated 
July 20, 2010 ( DTS #2010 -2939). See also 10092 (21I031Z APR 02); ■■■ 10022 Q21216Z 

APR 02); HBlHi; 10321 (231427Z MAY i 

2033 See HEADQUARTERS ^^H(250239Z JAN 03); 

For example, in January 2003, a CIA cable stated that Abu Zubaydah repeated that al-Tayyar studied in the 
United States. The only new information provided by Abu Zubaydah was that al-Tayyar’s nickname, “the pilot,” 
did not necessarily mean that al-Tayyar could fly an airplane. Abu Zubaydah explained to CIA officers that the term 
“the pilot” also me ans someone who is righteous. 

2034 ALEC^HI (1 11551 Z SEP 02) 

2035 CIA mB(072303Z NOV 02). See “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, 
Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT, April 3, 2003 . For more on the letters that were seized during the 
September 1 1 , 2002, raids in Pakistan, see ALEC HIIH (1 101 54Z JAN 03). See also DIRECTOR | 

(.1721 1 7Z SEP 02 ). 

See 22507 22508 20744 1 




2037 



CIA (072303Z NOV 02) 

TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 362 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



On March 1, 2003, KSM was captured. A notebook associated 
with KSM retrieved during the capture operation included the name “Jafar al-TAYYAR.” 2038 
After his capture, KSM was rendered to CIA custody, and immediately subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 2039 

On March 7, 2003, CIA Headquarters sent information on Jaffar al- 
Tayyar to the CIA’s DETENTION SITE BLUE, where KSM was located, for use in the 
interrogation of KSM. 2040 The documents included the following: 

• a “targeting study” on Jaffar al-Tayyar completed by the CIA in January 2003; 2041 

• a letter from KSM to bin al-Shibh referencing “Jafar the Pilot” and indicating that 
“Jafar” “ought to prepare himself’ to smuggle himself from Mexico into an unspecified 
country; 

• a letter from Jaffar al-Tayyar to Ramzi bin al-Shibh asking for clarification of KSM’s 
letter; and 

• additional background and reporting information on Jaffar al-Tayyar. 2042 

The requirements cable from CIA Headquarters to the detention 
site included numerous specific questions, relying on the information already known about Jaffar 
al-Tayyar. 2043 

According to CIA records, on March 9, 2003 — while KSM was 
being interrogated using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, but before he was 
subjected to the waterboard interrogation technique — the CIA interrogation team used two letters 
referencing al-Tayyar as the “interrogation vehicle” to elicit information from KSM on Jaffar al- 
Tayyar. 2044 CIA cables state that KSM did not provide — and claimed not to know — Jaffar al- 
Tayyar’ s true name. However, KSM stated that Jaffar al-Tayyar’ s father lived in Florida and 
was named “Shukri Sherdil.” 2045 This information was not accurate. Open source reporting 
indicates that Jaffar al-Tayyar’ s father’s true name was “Gulshair El Shukrijumah. 2046 




2038 April 3, 2003, Intelligence Community Terrorist Threat Assessment regarding KSM threat reporting, entitled 
“Khalid Shaykli Muhammad’s Threat Reporting — Precious Truths, Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies.” 

2039 See KS M detai nee review in Volume III. 

2040 ALEC MB (07221 5Z MAR 03) 

2041 ALEC ^^B(110209Z JAN 03) 

2042 ALEC (0722 15Z MAR 03) 

2043 ALEC (072215Z MAR 03). For more on the letten^hat were seized during the Septembe r 11, 200 2, 

raids in Pakistan, andAbuZubaydah’s reporting, see ALEC HH|^n0 1 5 4Z JAN 03); DIRECTOR I ' 

(17 21 17Z SEP 02); 10092 (2 1 1031Z APR 02)7 ^B^B 10022 (121216Z APR 02); f 

BHHH 10321 (231427Z MAY 02); Federal Bureau of Investigation 

documents pertaining “to the interrogation of detainee Zayn A1 Abideen Abu Zabaidah” and provided to the Senate 
Sel ect Commi ttee on Intelligence by cover letter dated July 20, 2010 (DTS #2010-2939). 

2044 10 741 (100917Z MAR 03) 

10741 (100917Z MAR 03); 10740 (092308Z MAR 03), disseminated as ■ 

2046 Among other open source news reports, see “Father denies son linked to terror.” St. Petersburg Times, published 
March 22, 2003. 

mi 1 1 m i i ii a i urn 

Page 363 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Over the course of the next two weeks, during the period when 
KSM was being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — including the 
waterboard — KSM referred to Jaffar al-Tayyar as being engaged in multiple terrorist operations. 
As a result, the CIA’s detention site began describing Jaffar as the “all-purpose” al-Tayyar whom 
KSM had “woven. . . into practically every story, each time with a different role.” 2047 CIA 
records confirm that KSM made numerous statements about Jaffar al-Tayyar’ s terrorist plotting 
that were deemed not to be credible by CIA personnel, 2048 including, but not limited to, 
statements that: 

• al-Tayyar was engaged in terrorist plotting with Jose Padilla; 2049 

• al-Tayyar was engaged in terrorist plots against Heathrow Airport; 2050 

• al-Tayyar was involved in terrorist plotting with Majid Khan; 2051 and 

• al-Tayyar was engaged in an assassination plot against former President Jimmy 
Carter. 2052 



O n March 12, 2003, when KSM was confronted with a page in his 
notebook about al-Tayyar, KSM stated that he “considered al-Tayyar to be the ‘next ‘emir’ for 
an attack against the US, in the same role that Muhammad Atta had for 1 1 September.” 2053 On 
March 16, 2003, KSM stated that the only comparison between Atta and al-Tayyar was their 
education and experience in the West. 2054 

An email exchange the afternoon of March 18, 2003, between CIA 
personnel expressed the views of interrogators and officers atCIAHeadquarters with regard to 
KSM and Jaffar al-Tayyar. The email from KSM debriefer HHHHHH stated: 

“we’ve finally gotten [KSM] to admit that al-Tayyar is meant for a plan in the 

US, but I’m still not sure he’s fessing up as to what Jafar’s role/plan really is. 

Today he’s working with Majid Khan, yesterday the London crowd, the day 




182140Z MAR 03) 

42247 (210357Z JUL 03); email from: 




2049 



10884 , 

; to: [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], 

[REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: RATHER PROFOUND IMPLICATIONS... Ammar al-Baluchi's 
Comments on Jaffar al-Tayyar-If Ammar is Correct, then KSM Appears to Have a Focused Us on Jaffar in a 
Extended Deception Scheme-and His Deception Capabilities are Not Broken Down; date: 07/21/03, at 11:24 AM. 
See also CIA (072303Z NOV 02) and “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, 

Surrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT^pri^, 2003. 

10741 (100917Z MAR 03); 11377 (231943Z APR 03), disseminated as | 

10778 (121549Z MAR 03), dissemin ated as 10883 

11717 (201722Z MAY 03), disseminated as 
10902 (201037Z MAR 03) 

10950 (222127Z MAR 03) 



03) , dissemina ted as HIHHUHI 

2051 10894 (191513Z MAR 03); 

2052 1Q959 (231205Z MAR 03); 

2053 107g7 ( 1307J6Z MAR 03) 

2054 10863 (171028Z MAR 03). It is unclear if KSM made the comparison in the first instance, or if the 

March 13, 2003, cable provided an inaccurate account of KSM’s statements. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states 
that “KSM did not call al-Tayyar ‘the next Muhammad Atta.’” The CIA’s June 2013 Response characterizes the 
inaccuracy as “an imprecise paraphrase of KSM.” 

mi 1 1 in i i"i 'ini mu i 

Page 364 of 499 






UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NGF O R N 



before Padilla - you get the point. Anyway, I’m still worried he might be 
misdirecting us on Jafar.” 2055 

An officer from CIA Headquarters responded, “1 agree. . .KSM is 
yanking our chain about Jafar. . . really trying hard to throw us off course. . . suggesting whatever 
Jafar really is up to must be baaaad [sic].” The officer noted that “[a]nother big hole is Jafar’ s 
true name,” and relayed that KSM’s use of “another Abu name. . . Abu Arif. . . doesn’t get us 
far.” 2056 When KSM was confronted with the reporting he had provided on Jaffar al-Tayyar, 
KSM claimed that he had been forced to lie about al-Tayyar because of the pressure he was 
under from his CIA interrogators, who had been subjecting KSM to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques since his rendition to CIA custody. 2057 

Additional CIA records from this period indicate that, while KSM 
claimed not to know Jaffar al-Tayyar’s true name, KSM suggested that Jose Padilla, then in U.S. 
military custody, would know his name. According to CIA records, the “FBI began participating 
in the military debriefings [of Jose Padilla] in March 2003, after KSM reported Padilla might 
know the true name of a US-bound al-Qa’ida operative known at the time only as Jaffar al- 
Tayyar. Padilla confirmed Jaffar al-Tayyar’s true name as Adnan El Shukrijumah.” 2058 

In March 2003, a senior CTC officer noted differences between 
KSM’s reporting and reporting from Ramzi bin al-Shibh. 2059 In April 2003, an Intelligence 
Community assessment concluded, based on comments from other detainees — including those 
not in CIA custody — that “[i]t seemed obvious that KSM was lying with regard to Jaffar al- 
Tayyar.” 2060 In July 2003, after Ammar al-Baluchi stated that Jaffar al-Tayyar was not suited to 
be an operative and was “not doing much of anything,” the deputy chairman of the Community 
Counterterrorism Board warned: 

“If [KSM] has pulled off focusing us on a person who is actually no threat, it 
would mean that our interrogation techniques have not/not broken down his 
resistance to any appreciable extent - and that we will have to doubt even more 
strongly anything he says.” 2061 



2055 Note for: [REDACTED]; from: [REDACTED], OFFICE: [DETENTION SITE BLUE]; Subject: JAFAR 
REQUEST; date: March 18, 2003, at 08:16:07 PM. 

2056 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: JAFAR REQUEST; date: March 18, 2003, at 
03: 49:33 PM. 

2057 ■■■■^10902 (201037Z MAR 03); 1095 9 (231205Z MAR 03 ); 10950 (2221 27Z MAR 

03);^mi 11377 (231943Z APR 03), disseminated as 

2058 CIA “Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting” faxed from the CIA to the Department of Justice on 
April 15, 2005, at 10:47AM. On March 21, 2003, CIA records state that a photograph of Gulshair El Shukrijumah’ s 
son was obtained from the FBI and shown t o KSM, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, and Abu Zubaydah, who all identified the 
photograph as thatofal-Tay ^ See ALEC H (210218Z MAR 03). 

2059 Email from: to [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: REISSUE/CORRECTION: 

CT: COMMENTS OF KHALID SHAYKH MUHAMMAD ON IMMINENT THREATS TO U.S. TARGETS IN 
THAILAND, INDONESIA, AND THE PHILIPPINES; date: March 12, 2003, at 9:36:57 AM. 

2060 “Khalid Shaykh Muhammad’s Threat Reporting - Precious Truths, S unrounded by a Bodyguard of Lies,” IICT, 

[REDACTED], 

, [REDACTED], 



Page 365 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 









TOP SECRET// 



UNCLASSIFIED 



# NOFORN 



I n December 2005, an NCTC Red Team report, entitled “Ja’far al- 
Tayyar: An Unlikely Al-Qa’ida Operational Threat,” highlighted the possibility that the 
information provided by KSM on al-Tayyar’s capabilities and terrorist plotting was simply 
deception. The report described a large body of other detainee reporting — from Abu Faraj al- 
Libi, Abu Talha al-Pakistani, ‘Abd al-Rahim Ghulam Rabbani, and Ammar al-Baluchi — 

consisting of largciy dismissive statements about Jaffar al-Tayyar’s capabilities and role in al- 
Qa’ida. - 



10. The Identification and Arrest of Saleh al-Marri 



The CIA represented to the CIA Office of Inspector General that 
as a result of the lawful use of EITs,” 2063 KSM “provided information that helped lead to the 
arrests of terrorists including... Saleh Almari, a sleeper operative in New York ” 2064 This 
information was included in the final version of the OIG’s May 2004 Special Review under the 
heading, Effectiveness. ,,J)65 This CIA representation is inaccurate. KSM was captured on 
March 1, 2003. 2066 Saleh al-Marri was arrested in December 2001. 2067 



The inaccurate statements about al-M arri to the OIG bega n with 
the July 16, 2003, OIG interview of Deputy Chief of ALEC Station 206 8 and 



[REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject; RATHER PROFOUND IMPLICATIONS; subject: RATHER 
PROFOUND IMPLICATIONS . . Ammar al-Baluchi’s Comments on Jaffar al-Tayyar-If Ammar is Correct, then 
KSM Appears to Have a Focused Us on Jaffar in a Extended Deception Scheme-and His Deception Capabilities are 
Not Broken Down; date; 07/21/03, at 1 1:24 AM. 

20 “ National Counterterrorism Center, REFLECTIONS, “Ja’ftt al-Tayyar: An Unlikely Al-Qa’ida Operational 
Threat, 22 December 2005. While NCTC’s “mainline analytic group" disagreed with the Red Team’s analytical 
conclusions, records do not indicate that the Red Team’s account of the contrary detainee reporting was challenged 

Draft MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE from the Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence General Counsel; SUBJECT: 

2063 See CIA memorandum to the CIA Inspector General from James Pavitt, CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations 
dated February 27, 2004, with the subject line, “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, ‘Counterterrorism Delenti™ 
and Interrogation Program’ (2003-7123-IG),” Attachment, "Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogatior^ctivities,’’ dated February 24, 2004. 

I Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Deputy Chief, Counterterrorist Center 
ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003; and CIA Office of Inspector General, Special Review - Counterterrorism 
Detention and Interrogation Program, (2003-7123-IG), May 2004. 

(20(B^ 7123KJ °M nSP 2004 r GenCra1 ’ Special Review “ Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program, 

2066 41351 

Information on ALI SALEH M K AL-MARRI, provided by the FBI to the Committee, March 26, 2002 (DTS 
#2002- 181 9). 

2068 (^^^M6^003, HH informed the OIG that KSM’s information “helped lead to the arrest of’ al-Marri. 
( See Memorandum for the Record; s ubject: M eeting with Deputy Chief, Counterterrorist Center 
ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003). Two days later, wrote an email with information intended for CIA 

leadership that stated, accurately, that al-Marri “had been detained on a material witness war rant based on 
information linking him to the 911 fi nancier Hasawi.” (See email from: to: 

2003°^^!^^™’ SUbje C ‘ : value of detainees; date: July 18, 

— 

Page 366 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T 



//NOFGR N 



were repeated in DDO Pavitt’s formal response to the draft OIG Special Review. 2069 The 
inaccurate statements were then included in the final May 2004 Special Review. Ihe 
“Effectiveness” section of the Special Review was used repeatedly as evidence for the 
effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including in CIA representations 
to the Department of Justice. The passage in the OIG Special Review that includes the 
inaccurate CIA representation that KSM provided information helping to lead to the arrest of al- 
Marri was referenced in the May 30, 2005, OLC memorandum analyzing the legality of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 207 ^ The portion of the Special Review discussing al- 
Marri has been declassified, as has the OLC memorandum. 2072 



The CIA also represented, in Pavitt’s formal response to the OIG, 
that prior to reporting from KSM, the CIA possessed no concrete information on al-Mani. 



2069 The January 2004 draft OIG Special Review included the inaccurate information provided by 
KSM “provided information that helped lead to the arrests of terrorists including... Saleh Almery, a sleeper 



mmmm , that 
per 

operative in New York.” ( See CIA Inspector General, Special Review, Counterterrorism Detention and 
Interrogatio n Program (2003-7 123-IG) January 2004). CTC’s response to the draft Special Review was likewise 
prepared by HHK who wl ' ote: “ KSM also identif5ed a photograph of a suspicious student in New York whom 
the FBI suspected of some in volvemen t with al-Qa’ida, but against whom we had no concrete information. Aftei 

wrote, “[tlhis student is now being held on a material witness warrant ” ( See 



describing KSM’s reporting 
email from: 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



subject: re Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: February 9, 2004.) DDO Pavitt’s formal 
response to the OIG draft Special Review included this representation, adding that the information was provided “as 
a result of the lawful use of EITs ” Pavitt’s memo to die OIG did not acknowledge that the “student now being held 
on a material witness warrant” had been arrested more than a year prior to the capture of KSM. Nor did it correct 
the inaccurate information in the OIG’s draft Special Review tiiat KSM’s information “helped lead to the arrest” of 
al-Marri. See memorandum for Inspector General from James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) 
Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program” (2003-7123-IG); 
date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism 



Detention and Interrogation Activities. 

2070 CIA Office of Inspector General, Special Review - Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program, 

(2003-7123-IG), May 2004. . , 

2071 In its May 30, 2005, memorandum, the OLC wrote, “we understand that interrogations have led to specific, 
actionable intelligence,” and “[w]e understand that the use of enhanced techniques in the interrogations of KSM, 
Zubaydah and others... has yielded critical information” (Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General 
Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, 
Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the 
Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda 
Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 1 1), citing IG Special Review at 86, 90-91. 

2072 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “CIA mistakenly provided incorrect information to the Inspector General 
(IG) that led to a one-time misrepresentation of this case in the IG’s 2004 Special Review. The CIA s June 201 3 
Response states that “[t]his mistake was not, as it is characterized in the ‘Findings and Conclusions section of the 
Study, a ‘repeatedly represented’ or ‘frequently cited’ example of the effectiveness of CIA’s interrogation program. 
The Committee found that, in addition to the multiple representations to the CIA OIG, the inaccurate information in 
the final OIG Special Review was, as noted above, provided by the CIA to the Department of Justice to support the 
Department’s analysis of the lawfulness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The OIG Special Review 
was also relied upon by the Blue Ribbon Panel evaluating the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, and later was cited in multiple open source articles and books, often in the context of the effectiveness 



of the CIA program 
2073 Email from: 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



; subject: re Addition on KSM/AZ and measures; date: February 9, 2004. Memorandum for: 
Inspecto^eneral^rom: James Pavitt, Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG 
Special Review, “Counterterrorism DetentionamUnterrog^ date: February 27, 2004; 

TOP 

Page 367 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O RN 



This representation is incongruent with CIA records. CIA records indicate that prior to the 
CIA’s detention of KSM, the CIA possessed significant information on al-Marri, who was 
arrested after making attempts to contact a telephone number associated with al-Qa’ida member 
and suspected 9/11 facilitator, Mustafa al-Hawsawi. 2074 CIA records indicate that al-Marri had 
suspicious information on his computer upon his arrest, 2075 that al-Marri’ s brother had travelled 
to Afghanistan in 2001 to join in jihad against the United States, 2076 and that al-Marri was 
directly associated with KSM, as well as with al-Hawsawi. 2077 



The FBI also had extensive records on al-Marri. On March 26, 
2002, a year before any reporting from KSM, the FBI provided the Committee with biographical 
and derogatory information on al-Mani, including al-Marri’ s links to Mustafa al-Hawsawi, 
suspicious information found on al-Marri’ s computer, and al-Marri’ s connections to other 



extremists 



2078 



11. The Collection of Critical Tactical Intelligence on Shkai, Pakistan 

In the context of the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, the CIA represented to policymakers over several years that “key 
intelligence” was obtained from the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques that 
revealed Shkai, Pakistanjx^^iUTiak^^ tribal areas,” and resulted in 

“tactical intelligence in Shkai, Pakistan.” 2079 These CIA 



attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation 
Activities. 

2074 ALEC (2923 19Z APR 03) 

2075 The laptop contained files and Internet bookmarks associated with suspicious chemicals and che mical 

distributors, aswell as computer programs typically used by hackers. See WASHINGTON (122314Z MAR 

03); ALEC (2923 19Z APR03). 

2076 CIA WASHINGTON DC (26001 8Z MAR 03) 

2077 Prior to the capture of KSM, Abd al-Rahim Ghulam Rabbani told the FBI that al-Marri had called KSM and had 
been seen with KSM at an al-Qa’ida guesthouse. In addition, email accounts found on a compu ter seized during the 
raid that captured KSM revealed links to accounts associated with al-Marri. See ALEC BMM(292319Z APR 03); 
WASHINGTON ■■ (122314Z MAR 03); ALEC (031759Z MAR 03); ALEC||H (052341Z MAR 
03). 



2078 The FBI information included that al-Marri’s brother “traveled to Afghanistan in 1997-1998 to train in Bin - 
Laden camps.” It also indicated that al-Marri’s computer revealed bookmarks to websites associated with religious 
extremism and various criminal activities, as well as hacking tools ( See FBI document on Ali Saleh MK Al-Marri, 
provided to the Committee, March 26, 2002 (DTS #2002-1819)). Despite the extensive derogatory information on 
al-Marri in the possession of both the CIA and FBI, the CIA’s June 2013 Response repeats previous CIA 
representations that prior to KSM’s reporting, the CIA had “no concrete information” on al-Marri. The CIA’s June 
2013 Response also states that the previously obtained information was “fragmentary,” and that while the CIA and 
FBI were aware of al-Marri’s links to al-Qa’ida and “strongly suspected him of having a nefarious objective,” “both 
agencies... lacked detailed reporting to confirm these suspicions. ...” 

2079 Among other documents, see : (1) CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central 
Intelligence,” Subject: “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” included in email 



from: 



and 



|; subject: “paper on 



value of interrogation techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM. The email references the attached 
“information paper to Dr. Rice explaining the value of the interrogation techniques,” (2) CIA Memorandum for 
Steve B radbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from HBH, 
Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation 
Techniques,” (3) CIA Talking Points entitled/Talkin^oint^^^^Marcl^005 DCI Meeting PC: Effectiveness of 
T OP SECRE TflMiMil— ^^^M//NQEORN 



Page 368 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



representations were based on the CIA’s experience with one CIA detainee, Hassan Ghul. While 
CIA records indicate that Hassan Ghul did provide information on Shkai, Pakistan, a review of 
CIA records found that: (1) the vast majority of this information, including the identities, 
activities, and locations of senior al-Qa’ida operatives in Shkai, was provided pri or to Hassa n 
Ghul be ing subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques; (2) CIA’s IHHI 
assessed that Ghul’s reporting prior to the use of th e CIA’s enhanced interroga tion 
techniques contained sufficient detail to press the Pakistani ^ IK and (3) 
the CIA assessed that the information provided by Ghul corroborated earlier reporting that the 
Shkai valley of Pakistan served as al-Qa’ida’s command and control center after the group’s 
2001 exodus from Afghanistan. 2080 

As an example of one of the CIA’s representations on Shkai, 
Pakistan, and the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, on March 2, 
2005, the CIA responded to a request from the OLC “for the intelligence the Agency obtained 
from detainees who, before their interrogations, were not providing any information of 
intelligence [value].” The resulting CIA memorandum, with the subject line “Effectiveness of 
the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” included the following under the heading, 
“Results”: 



“CIA’s use of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of a 
comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist 
plots, capture additional terrorists, and collect a high volume of critical 
intelligence on al-Qa’ida. We believe that intelligence acquired from these 
interrogations has been a key reason why al-Qa’ida has failed to launch a 
spectacular attack in the West since 11 September 2001. Key intelligence 
collected from HVD interrogations after applying interrogation 
techniques:” 2081 



UNF) The CIA then listed “Shkai, Pakistan” as an example, stating: 



“Shkai, Pakistan: The interrogation of Hassan Ghul provided detailed tactical 
intelligence showing that Sh kai, Pakistan was a majo r Al-Qa’ida hub in the 
tribal areas. Through use of during the Ghul 



the High-Value Detainee Interrogation (HVDI) Techniques,” (4) CIA briefing document dated May 2, 2006, 
entitled, “BRIEFING FOR CHIEF OF STAFF TO THE PRESIDENT 2 May 2006 Briefing for Chief of Staff to the 
President Josh Bolten: CIA Rendition, Detention and Interrogation Programs,” (5) CIA classified Statement for the 
Record, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, provided by General Michael V. Hayden, Director, Central 
Intelligence Agency, 12 April 2007 (DTS #2007-1563), and accompanying Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
hearing transcript for April 12, 2007, entitled, “Hearing on Central Intelligence Agency Detention and Interrogation 
Program” (DTS #2007-3158), and (6) CIA Briefing for Obama National Security Team - “Renditions, Detentions, 
and Interrogations (RDI)” including “Tab 7,” named “RDG Copy- Briefing on RDI Program 09 Jan. 2009, “ 
prepared “13 January 2009.” 

2080 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Detainee Profile on Hassan Ghul for coord; date: 
December 30, 2005, at 8:14:04 AM. 

2081 Italics in original document. CIA Memorandum for Steve Bradbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 



Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from 



| Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject 



‘Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 369 of 499 




m QFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



interrogation, we mapped out and pinpoi nted the residences of key AQ lead ers 
in Shkai. This intelligence was provided 

1 : JtP 1 * 5fe^T>20R2 



The CIA representation that the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques produced otherwise unavailable tactical intelligence related to Shkai, 
Pakistan, was provided to senior policymakers and the Department of Justice between 2004 and 
2009. 2083 



Hassan Ghul was captured on January 2004, by foreign 
autho rities in the Iraqi Kurdistan Region. 2084 Ghul was reportedly first interrogated by H 
■I, 2085 then transferred to U.S. military custody and questioned, and then rendered to CIA 
custody on January H 2004. 2086 Hassan Ghul spent two days at DETENTION SITE COBALT 
before being transferred to the CIA’s DETENTION SITE BLACK on January 2004. Prior to 
his capture, the CIA assessed that Ghul possessed substantial knowledge of al-Qa’ida facilities 
and procedures in Wana and Shkai, Pakistan. 2087 



During Hassan Ghul’s two days at DETENTION SITE COBALT, 
CIA interrogators did not use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Ghul. Instead, 
CIA cables state that upon his arrival at the CIA detention site, Hassan Ghul was “examined, and 



2082 



CIA Memorandum for Steve Bradbury at Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, 



from 



Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA 
Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” In its June 2013 Response, the CIA states: “We never represented that 
Shkai was previously unknown to us or that Gul only told us about it after he was subjected to enhanced 
interrogation techniques. We said that after these techniques were used, Gul provided ‘detailed tactical 
intelligence.’ That intelligence differed significantly in granularity and operational utility from what he provided 
before enhanced techniques.” As described in this summary, CIA representations about intelligence on Shkai were 
used as evidence of the necessity and effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The CIA did 
not inform policymakers or the Department of Justice about the extensive information provided by Hassan Ghul on 
Shkai prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

2083 See, for example, CIA memorandum to “National Security Advisor,” from “Director of Central Int elligence ,” 
Subject: “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques,” included in email from: 



; to: 



I, and 



|; subject: “paper on value of 



interrogation techniques”; date: December 6, 2004, at 5:06:38 PM; CIA Memorandum for Steve Bradbury at Office 



of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from 



Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” 



Legal Group, DCI 



2084 

2085 



21753 



IAN 04) 



|; HEADQUARTERS Bi 

On April 16, 2013, the Council on Foreign Relations hosted a forum in relation to the screening of the film, 
“Manhunt.” The forum included former CIA officer Nada Bakos, who states in the film that Hassan Ghul provided 
critical information on Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti’s connection to UBL to Kurdish officials prior to entering CIA 
custody. When asked about the interrogation techniques used by the Kurds, Bakos stated: “...honestly, Hassan 
Ghul... when he was being debriefed by the Kurdish government, he literally was sitting there having tea. He was in 
a safe house. He wasn’t locked up in a cell. He wasn’t handcuffed to anything. He was — he was having a free 
flowing conversation. And there’s — you know, there’s articles in Kurdish papers about sort of their interpretation of 
the story and how forthcoming he was.” See www.cfr.org/counterterrorism/film-screening-manhunt/p30560. 



2086 



HEADQ UARTERS 

n JAN 04) 
1308 (P 
1313(| 





TOP SECRET/ 



JAN 04); 

FEB 04 ) 

yNOFORN 



AN 04); DIRECTOR 



JAN 



1308 



Page 370 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 



placed in a cell, given adequate clothing, bedding, water and a waste bucket.” 2088 During this 
two-day period (January 2004, and January 2004), 2089 Ghul provided information for at 

least 21 intelligence reports. 2090 As detailed below, Ghul’s reporting on Shkai, Pakistan, and al- 
Qa’ida operatives who resided in or visited Shkai, was included in at least 16 of these 
intelligence reports. 2091 The reports included information on the locations, movements, and 
operational security and training of senior al-Qa’ida leaders living in Shkai, Pakistan, as well as 
the visits of leaders and operatives to the area. The information provided by Ghul included 
details on various groups operating in Shkai, Pakistan, and conflicts among the groups. Hassan 
Ghul also identified and decoded phone numbers and email addresses contained in a notebook 
seized with him, some of which were associated with Shkai-based operatives. 2092 

) Hassan Ghul described the origins of al-Qa’ida’ s presence in 
Shkai, including how Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi became the original group’s military commander and 
its al-Qa’ida representative. 2093 He discussed tensions between al-Hadi and others in Shkai, the 



DE TENTION SITE COBALT to a 
2090 ■■■■Hi 541 
later released as HEADQUARTERS 
04), later released as HEADQU ARTERS 
JAN 04), later released as HEADQUARTERS 



AN 04) 

AN 04). CIA records state that Hassan Ghul was removed from 



facility for portions of his interrogations. 



AN04)~BH^^^^^^^Hl644H^^WAN04), 

■ J AN04)T^^^^^^^^|Hl645B|^BlAN 



JAN 04); 



AN 04); 



I 






1650 




JA 


m 



CIA 

1651 



AN 04); 



DIRECTOR 



1655 



la 



AN 04); 



I 



SH 



FEB 04); 
AN 04); 
AN 04); 



FEB 04); 






I 



30 



1652 



AN 04); 

AN 04), later re leased as 
1657 ^^^HJAN 04); 

1679 AN 04); 

1681 ^^^HAN 04), later released as 



1685 ^HlAN 04), later released as 



1687 ^^^■JAN 04), later released as 



FEB 04); 1688 JAN 04), later released as 



FEB 04); 



165(5 HHIHPAN 04); 1678 AN 04). As the dissemination 

of 21 intelligence reports suggests, information in CIA records indicates Hassan Ghul was cooperative with CIA 
personnel prior to being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. In an interview with die CIA 
OIG, a CIA officer familiar with Ghul stated, “He sang like a tweetie bird. He opened up right away and was 
cooperative from the outset.” See December 2, 2004, interview with [REDACTED], Chief, DO, CTC UBL 



De partment, 

AN042lBHBH^H 1644^0H JAN 
AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 

AN 04); 
lN 04) 

2093 Hass an Ghul also described the ro les o f ‘Abd al-R ahman al-Kanadi, aka Ahmed Sai’d al-Khadr, and Abu Hamza 
al-Jawfi 1685 ^ 



Page 371 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





































UNCLASSIFIED 



mediating role of Abu Faraj al-Libi, and the role of Khalid Habib. 2094 Hassan Ghul ex plained 
how he moved to Shkai due to concerns about Abu Musa’b al-Baluchi’s contacts with HHR 
, how he traveled to Shkai to make contact with Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi, and how Abu 
Faraj mediated between Ghul and Hamza Rabi’a. 2095 Ghul stated that he last saw Abu Faraj in 
the summer of 2003, when Ghul was seeking Abu Faraj’ s assistance in moving money from 
Saudi Arabia to deliver to al-Hadi for support of their community in Shkai. 2096 

According to Hassan Ghul, Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi moved 
periodically among various houses within the village, including that of Abu Hussein and ^^H 
HH, whom he described as “senior media people for al-Qa’ida.” 2097 Elaborating on al- 
Hadi’ s location, Hassan Ghul described the importance of both a madrassa and a guesthouse in 
Shkai known as the “bachelor house,” where unaccompanied men stayed. Ghul stated that he 
last saw al-Hadi in December 2003 when al-Hadi came to the “bachelor house” to visit with 
other Arabs. 2098 Ghul also identified other permanent and transient residents of the “bachelor 
house.” 2099 He stated that al-Hadi, who he believed was seeking another safehouse in Shkai at 
which to hold meetings, had approximately 40 to 50 men under his command. Hassan Ghul also 
identified a phone number used to contact al-Hadi. 2100 



1685 04) 

1677^HV jan 04) 

^Hassan Gul statedthatAbu Faraj was with his associate, Mansur Khan, aka Hassan. (See 
KmH 1654 mmiAN 04).) Hassan Ghul’s reporting on Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi and Abu Faraj al-Libi 
included discussion of Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti’s links to UBL. According to Ghul, during his time in Shkai in 2003, 
al-Hadi would periodically receive brief handwritten messages from UBL via Abu Faraj, which he would share with 
their group. Ghul stated that this did not necessarily mean that Abu Faraj knew the location of UBL, but rather that 
he had a window into UBL’s courier network. It wa s at this point that Hassan Gh ul de scribed the role of Abu 
Ahmed al-Kuwaiti and his connectio ns to UBL. See ^^HHHHHI^KRriTjHHHLAN 04). 

1654 ^^^SlAN 04). Hassan Ghul stated 



see 1679 mBAN 

2098 Hassan Ghul stated that al-Hadi, who did not travel with a security detail, visited the madrassa every few days, 

but less frequently of late due to the deteriorating security condition in Waziristan for Arabs. Ghul stated that when 
he last saw al-Hadi, he was accompanied by an Afghan assistant name d Sidri, aka S’aid al-Rahman . He also 
identified Osaid al- Yemeni as an individual who assisted al-Hadi. See 1654 ^m| 

JAN 04). 

2099 n assan Ghul identified Yusif al-Baluchi, Mu’awiyya al-Baluchi, aKuidnamedQassam Usamaal- 

Filistini, and Khatal al-Uzbeki as living in the “bachelor house.” See 1654 

JAN 04). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “After being subjected to enhanced techniques, [Hassan Ghul] 
provided more granular information.” According to the CIA Response, it was in this context that Hassan Ghul 
identified the “bachelor house,” where he had met al-Hadi, and where “several unmarried men associated with al- 
Qa’ida” lived, including A review of CIA records found that Hassan Ghul provided this 

information prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

2100 Hassan Ghul identified a phone number in his phone book that he said had been provided to him by Hamza al- 
Jawfi to pass messages to al-Hadi in emergencies. The phone number was under the name Baba Jan, aka Ida Khan. 
Ghu^ls^dentifie^^iumber for Maior^ka Ridwan, aka Bilal, who, he said, bro ught equipment to Pakistan. See 
HMHM 1654 H^HtANOflkl^l^HHi^Hi 1646 Him JAN 04)). 



Page 372 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP S ECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



According to Hassan Ghul, as of December 2003, approximately 
60 Arab males and between 150 and 200 Turkic/Uzbek males were living in Shkai, along with a 
“significant population” of Baluchis who assisted the Arabs and Uzbeks. 2101 Ghul described al- 
Qa’ida training, including an electronics course taught in the fall of 2003 by Abu Bakr al-Suri at 
the house of Hamza Rabi’a where, he believed, individuals were being trained for an ongoing 
operation. 2102 Ghul discerned from the training and Rabi’a’s statements that al-Qa’ida operatives 
in Shkai were involved in an assassination attempt against Pakistani President Pervez 
Musharraf. 2103 Ghul stated Hamza Rabi’a was also likely planning operations into Afghanistan, 
but had no specifics. 2104 

Hassan Ghul elaborated on numerous other al-Qa’ida operatives he 
said resided in or visited Shkai, Pakistan, including Shaikh Sa’id al-Masri, 2105 Sharif al-Masri, 2106 



2101 



1655 



IAN 04) 



2102 Hassan Ghul stated that Abu Jandal and another Saudi of African descent took part in the electronics course. 



{See 



1654 



1655 



JAN 04).) 



IAN 04); | 

As described in a separate cable, Ghul stated that he had seen 10-15 Pakistanis training with Rabi’ a and Abu Bakr 
al-Suri, who m lie described as an al-Qa’ida explosives expert, in early to mid-October 2003. {See 

1656 H»AN 04).) The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that Hassan Ghul reported diat Hamza 
Rabi’a “was using facilities in Shkai to train operatives for attacks outside Pakistan,” without noting Ghul’s 
reporting, prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, on Rabi’a’s training of operatives. 

2103 Ghul explained that he was in Shkai following a previous assassination attempt, in early December 2003, when 

there was “frequent talk among the brothers” about who might have been responsible. When Ghul asked around, 
“there was a lot of talk” that Rabi’a was involved in planning a subsequent operation. Rabi’a’s statement that there 
would be an unspecified operation soon, combined with the training conducted by Rabi’a and al-Suri, led G hul to 
believe tha t the second assassination attempt was conducted by al-Qa’ida. See 1656 

^^■JAN 04). 

2104 Hassan Ghul stated that it was unlikely that Abd al-Hadi al-lraqi had any planned operations, although al-Hadi 



would likely assist if there were any. See 



1654 



AN 04). 



2105 Hassan Ghul stated that Shaikh Sa’id al-Masri, aka Mustafa Ahmad (Abu al-Yazid), came to Shkai around 
November 2003 and currently resided there. Ghul stated that Shaikh Sa’id’s son, Abdullah, travelled b etween Shkai 
and a location in the greater Dera Ismail Khan area, where the rest of Shaikh Sa’ id’s family lived. See 



1679 



JAN 04). 



2106 Hassan Ghul stated that Sharif al-Masri, who came to Shkai around October/November 2003 for a brief visit, 



was handling o perations in 
assistants. See 



andahar while living 

b 1679l 

TOP SECRE T//" 



just outs ide Quetta. 
| J AN 04). 

Page 373 of 499 



Ghul identified two of Sharif al-Masri ’s 



//NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



Abu Maryam, 2107 Janat Gul, 2108 Khalil Deek, 2109 Abu Talha al-Pakistani, 2110 Firas, 2111 and 
others. 2112 



Finally, Hassan Ghul described his interactions with Abu Mus’ab 
al-Zarqawi, which also related to al-Qa’ida figures in Shkai, in particular Abd al-Hadi al- 
Iraqi. 2113 Ghul described al-Zarqawi’s request to al-Hadi for money, explosive experts, and 
electronic experts, and provided details of his own trip to Iraq on behalf of al-Hadi. 2114 Hassan 




2107 Hassan Ghul was asked about Tariq Mahmoud, whom he thought might be Abu Maryam, a British citizen of 
Pakistani descent whom Ghul met in Pakistan. According to Ghul, Marya m had been inside Afghanis tan and had 

K lin training in Shkai, but was apprehended in Islamabad. ( See \ 

AN 04).) Ghul identified a phone number for Abu Maryam. See \ 

AN 04). 

2,08 Hassan Ghul stated that he last saw Janat Gul in December 2003 in Shkai, when Janat Gul was delivering three 
Arabs who had come from Iran. Janat Gul came to the “bachelor house” accompanied by Khatal. Ghul also 
described a discussion from September/October 2003 at Hamza al-Jawfi’s house in Shkai with al-Hadi and Abu 
‘Abd al-Rahman BM in which Janat Gul claimed to know Russians who could provide anti-aircraft missiles. Gul 
asked for money, but al-Hadi was reluctant to make the commitment and did not want to work with Gul. According 
to Hassan Ghul, Janat Gul left and subsequent conversations revealed that Janat Gul likely made the story up. 



Hassan Ghul provided a phone number for Janat Gul. See 

16461 



1679 



JAN 04); 



| JAN 04). 

2,09 Hassan Ghul also discussed Abu Bilal al-Suri, aka, Shafiq, who was the father-in-law of Khalil Deek, aka Joseph 
Jacob Adams, aka Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman BM, aka Abu Ayad al-Filistini. While Ghul did not know where Abu Bil al 
was l ocated, he had recently seen Abu Bilal’s son preparing a residence in Shkai. See 
1679 JAN 04). 

2110 Hassan Ghul stated that he knew Talha al-Pakistani, aka Suleiman, peripherally, through KSM and Ammar al- 
Baluchi. Ghul last saw Talha in Shkai around October/November 2003 at the residence of Hamza Rabi’a with a 
group that was undertaking unspecified training. Ghul stated that he was not sure if Talha was a participant or 



simply an observer. See 



1679 




AN 04). 



on H October 2003 



2111 Hassan Ghul was shown photos of individuals apprehended by ] 
and identified one as a Yemeni named Firas, “a well-trained fighter and experienced killer, who was known to be an 
excellent shot.” Ghul reported that, when he first arrived in Shkai, Firas was living there. Prior to hearing about 
Firas’ arrest, Ghul’s understanding was that Firas was in Angorada with Khalid Habib, which Ghul characterized as 
the “front line.” The other photo identified by Ghul was that of an Algerian named Abu Maryam, whom helped 



“hide out” in Shkai. See 



1678 



JAN 04). 



2112 For Ha ssan Ghul’s reporting on Abu Umama, aka Abu Ibrahim al-Masri, see 
JAN 04). 




1644 



JAN 04; 



JAN 04), disseminated as 




1687 

AN 04); 
54195 



DIRECTO R 
■■■JAN 04) 

2114 Hassan Ghul stated that in the late summer of 2003, al-Zarqawi made the request through Luay Muhammad Hajj 
Bakr al-Saqa (aka Abu Hamza al-Suri, aka Abu Muhammad al-Turki, aka Ala’ al-Din), but that al-Hadi had not 
wanted to assist. According to Ghul, al-Hadi had previously sent Abdullah al-Kurdi to Iraq, but al-Kurdi did not 
want to engage in any activities and was rumored to be “soft.” This led al-Hadi to send Ghul to Iraq to speak with 
al-Zarqawi regarding the possibility of select al-Qa’ida members traveling to Iraq to fight. According to the cable, 
“Ghul claimed that the Arabs in Waziristan were tired, and wanted change,” and that Ghul “was tasked to both 



1644 



JAN 04).) 



discuss this issue with Zarqawi, and to recon the route.” ( See \ 

Ghul also describe the roles of Yusif al-Baluchi, Mu’awiyya al-Baluchi, and Wasim aka Ammar aka Little Ammar 
aka Ammar Choto, in facilitating Ghul’s trip out of Pakistan, as well as his exact route. Ghul identified Yusif’s 
phone number in his notebook and described how Yusif had come to Shkai to gain al-Hadi ’s approval for a plan to 
kidnap Iranian VIPs to gain the release of senior al-Qa’ida Management Council members in Iranian custody. ( See 



1690 

T OP SECRET/ 




^ NOFORN 



Page 374 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 



Ghul identified four email addresses for contacting al-Zarqawi directly, 2115 and described a 
phone code he would use to communicate with al-Zarqawi. 2116 Ghul also described his 
conversations with al-Zarqawi, interpreted the notes he had taken of the last of his conversations 
with al-Zarqawi, identified operatives whom al-Zarqawi and al-Hadi agreed to send to Iraq, 2117 
and discussed strategic differences between al-Zarqawi and al-Hadi related to Iraq 2118 

) On January 2004, after two days at DETENTION SITE 
COBALT, during which Hassan Ghul provided the aforementioned information about al-Qa’ida 
activities in Shkai and other matters, Ghul was transferred to the CIA’s DETENTION SITE 
BLACK. 2119 Ghul was immediately, and for the first time, subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. He was “shaved and barbered, stripped, and placed in the standing 
position.” 2120 According to a CIA cable, Hassan Ghul provided no new information during this 
period and was immediately placed in standing sleep deprivation with his hands above his head, 
with plans to lower his hands after two hours. 2121 In their request to use the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques on Ghul, CIA detention site personnel wrote: 

“The interrogation team believes, based on [Hassan Ghul’s] reaction to the 
initial contact, that his al-Qa’ida briefings and his earlier experiences with U.S. 
military interrogators have convinced him there are limits to the physical 
contact interrogators can have with him. The interrogation team believes the 
approval and employment of enhanced measures should sufficiently shift 



1646^^^HAN 04) 

1645 AN 04) 

2117 The notes, which Ghul intended to use to brief Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi, had been seized during Ghul’s capture. The 
topics included al-Zarqawi’s willingness to provide missiles to al-Hadi, al-Zarqawi’s offer to provide al-Hadi with 
an unspecified chemical weapon agent, al-Zarqawi’s request to al-Hadi for walkie talkies, and al-Zarqawi’s 
willingness to work out any disagreements with al-Hadi. According to Ghul, al-Zarqawi responded positively to al- 
Hadi’s offer of al-Qa’ida personnel and discussed a number of specific, named individuals, including Khatal al- 
Uzbeki and a Palestinian named Usama al-Zargoi. Al-Zarqawi requested that al-Hadi facilitate the travel of an 
operative who could assist in training inexperienced operatives in proper operational security. Al-Zarqawi also 
identified a Jordanian explosives expert named ‘Abd al-Badi, an Algerian explosives expert named al-Sur, and 
Munthir, a Moroccan religious scholar who was a close friend of al-Zarqawi. Ghul identified another operative, 

Abu Aisha, who explained to him that al-Zarq awi’s reference to chemical w eap ons was like ly a refe rence to a 
chemical agent affixed to howitzer shells. See HIHUHHHfli 1646 HHHpAN 04); 

|1AN04)^^^^^^^H^^K4194HH^EAN04);D1RECTORHH^ 

disseminated ^41 95 BHUTAN 

1650 [^ 

2118 According to Hassan Ghul, al-Zarqawi told Ghul in January 2004 that he intended to assassinate senior Shi’ite 

scholars, attack Sh’ite gatherings with explosives, and foment civil war in Iraq. Ghul stated that Abd al-Hadi al- 
Iraqi was opposed to any operations in Iraq that would promote bloodshed among Muslims, and had counseled al- 
Zarqawi against undertaking such operations. Using Ghul as an envoy, al-Hadi had inquired with al-Zarqawi about 
whether he (al-Hadi) should travel to Iraq, but al-Zarqawi had responded that this wa^io^^oo^dea^^perations 
in Iraq wer e far different than those al-Hadi was conducting in AMianistan. See 1651 

mm™ 04)). See also 1652 BHHlAN 04), for Ghul’s reporting on al- 

Zar qawi’s plots i n Ira q. 

21 19 1283 an 04). 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



[Hassan Ghul’s] paradigm of what he expects to happen. The lack of these 
increasd [sic] measures may limit the team’s capability to collect critical and 
reliable information in a timely manner.” 2122 



CIA Headquarters approved the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Hassan Ghul in order to “sufficiently shift [Ghul’s] paradigm of 
what he can expect from the interrogation process, and to increase base’s capability to collect 
critical and reliable threat information in a timely manner.” 2123 CIA records do not indicate that 
information provided by Ghul during this period, or after, resulted in the identification or capture 
of any al-Qa’ida leaders. After his arrival at DETENTION SITE BLACK, Ghul was asked to 



identify locations on | 
time, by interrogators, 



2124 



and line drawings of Shkai provided to him, for the first 



Hassan Ghul’s reporting on Shkai prior to the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques was compiled by th e CIA for passage to the Pakistani 
government. On January 28, 2004, issued a cable stating that the information 

on Shkai provided by Hassan Ghul prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, combined with reporting un related to the CIA’ s Detention and Interrogation 
Program, “moved Shkai to the forefront and that “[a]s a re sult, Station is 

currently its Shkai ^ J anuar Y 

29, 2004, ALEC Station proposedthat^^^^^^^^^finitiate a discussion with the Pakistanis 
on “possible Arabs in Shkai,” and concurred with a tear-line that requests that Pakistan 



2122 

2123 



HEADQUARTERS 




AN 04) 



JAN 04). On 



DDO Pavitt expressed his personal 



congratulations to the interrogators at DETENTION SITE COBALT, who elicited information from Hassan Ghul 
prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Pavitt’s message stated: “In the short time Ghul 
was at your location, [interrogators] made excellent progress and generated what appears to be a great amount of 
highly interesting information and leads. This is exactly the type of effort with a detainee that will win the war 
against al-Qai’da. With th e intelligence Stati on has obtained from Ghul, we will be able to do much damage to the 

HHH -IAN 04). 



enemy.” See DIRECTOR 

2,24 Many of the questions for Hassan Ghul for more specific locational information were about sites Ghul had 
mentioned or described during his interrogations at DETENTION SITE COBALT. ( See HEADQUARTERS 



| JAN 04); | 



1299 (I 



| JAN 04) 



JAN 04); 



20401 



FEB 04); 



[REDACTED]; to: [REDA CTED1, [REDA CTED] 
1HHH> [REDACTED], 

Shkai. Please provide comments/requirements; 




20352 



20353 



JAN 04); | 

FEB 04)). See also email from: 

, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; cc: ■■ 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: HG on 
"1, at 1:11:01 PM; and attachments.) The CIA’s 



June 2013 Response states that while Hassan Ghul provided “some detail about the activities and general 
whereabouts of al-Qa’ida members in Shkai” prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interroga tion tech niques, only 
afterwards did he “providef j more granular information when, for example, he sat down with |||^^| experts and 
pointed to specific locations where he met some of the senior al-Qa’ida members we were trying to find.” A review 
of CIA r ecords found that Hassan Ghul was not provided the opportunity to identify specific locations on |H 

Km and line drawings until after he was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

2i25 T) le ca b] e noted th at “[bjefore Ghul’s capture, the Shkai valley had already been an area of focus 
mmsmmmm- The cable detailed Hassan Ghul’s reporting prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
inteiTogation techniques, as well as information unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 



including extensive information on Shkai from 




sources, the locations in Shkai 



, and exact geolocational coordinates for numerous sites in Shkai. See 
04). 

Page 376 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















, and other terrorist 



tear-line for Pakistan included extensive information provided by Hassan Ghul prior to the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2129 On February 3, 2004^CI^Headquarters 
requested that the tear-line be passed to the Pakistanis, but de ferred to on 

portions dealing with Shkai. 2130 As CIA’s informed CIA Headquarters on 

February 9, 2004, it intended to hold the information on Shkai until t he PCI’s visit to Pakista n 
the followin g day. As Station noted, “this tearline will prove critical | 

” 2131 In the meantime and afterwards, additional tear- lines were prepared for the 
Pakistanis that were based primarily on reporting from Hassan Ghul prior to the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, combined with Ghul’s subsequent reporting, and information 
from sources unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 2132 



2126 ALEC 

2127 



290157Z JAN 04) 
1 ( 



JAN 04); 



AN 04); 






2714 (311146Z JAN 04) 

2714 (31 1146Z JAN 04). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “CIA continues to assess 
that the information derived from Hassan Gul after the commencement of enhanced techniques provided new and 
unique insight into al-Qa’ida’s presence and operations in Shkai, Pakistan.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response also 
defends past CIA representations that “after these techniques were used, Gulprovided ‘detailed tactical 
intelligence,”’ that “differed significantly in granularity and operational from what he provided before 
enhanced techni ques.” The CIA’s Response then states that “[a]s a result of his information, we w ere able to make a 
case 

CIA records found that the CIA had previously determined that the information provided by Hassan Ghul prior to 
the use of the CIA ’s enhan ced interrogation techniques was the “perfect fodder for pressing [Pakistan] into action.” 
2,30 HEADQUAR BH (032357Z FEB 04) 

2742 (090403Z FEB 04) 

60796 (051600Z FEB 04); ALEC ■■ (^BB FEB 04); DIRECTOR 
FEB 04). The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[s]enior US officials during the winte^n^prin^^004 
resented the Agency’s analysis of Gul’s debriefings and other intelligence about Shkai 



” As support, the CIA Response cites two cables that relied heavily on information 
provided by Hassan Ghul prior to th e use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques^as^vell as information 
from unrelated sources. ( See ALEC BIB (BB^B FEB 04); DIRECTOR FEB 04)). 



Page 377 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQFORN 



1 1 1 i'l i n|ii i ill' i in i i iiilmiiiii ii iih their 

activities and waiting for the situation to normalize in the tribal areas.” In particular, “[a]l- 
Qa’ida’s senior operatives who were in Shkai before the military’s offensive remained in South 
Waziristan as of mid-June [2004]. ” 2133 Later, in December 2005, a CIA detainee profile of 
Hassan Ghul assessed that the information provided by Ghul confirmed earlier reporting in 
CIA’s possession that the Shkai valley of Pakistan served as al-Qa’ida’s command and control 
center after the group’s 2001 exodus from Afghanist an, 2134 Hassan Ghul was 
” I, and later released. 2135 





12. Information on the Facilitator that Led to the UBL Operation 



Shortly after the raid on the Usama bin Ladin (UBL) compound on 
May 1, 2011, which resulted in UBL’s death, CIA officials described the role of reporting from 
the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program in the operation — and in some cases connected 
the reporting to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2137 The vast majority of 



2133 Directorate of Intelligence, Al-Qa’ida’s Waziristan Sanctuary Disrupted but Still Viable, 21 July 2004 (DTS 
#2004-3240). 

2,34 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Detainee Profile on Hassan Ghul for coord; date: 
December 30, 2005, at 8:14:04 AM. 



UARTERS 




1635 




[; HEAD QUARTERS 

173426 

2136 Congressional Notification (DTS #2012-3802). 

2137 In addition to classified representations to the Committee, shortly after the operation targeting UBL on May 1, 
2011, there were media reports indicating that the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program had produced "the 
lead information" that led to Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, the UBL compound, and/or the overall operation that led to 
UBL’s death. In an interview with Time Magazine , published May 4, 201 1 , Jose Rodriguez, the former CIA chief of 
CTC, stated that: “Information provided by KSM and Abu Faraj al-Libbi about bin Laden’s courier was the lead 
information that eventually led to the location of [bin Laden’s] compound and the operation that led to his death.” 
See “Ex-CIA Counterterror Chief: ‘Enhanced Interrogation’ Led U.S. to bin Laden.” Time Magazine, May 4, 2011 
(italics added). Former CIA Director Michael Hayden stated that: “What we got, the original lead information — 
and frankly it was incomplete identity information on the couriers — began with information from CIA detainees at 
the black sites" In another interview, Hayden stated: “...the lead information I referred to a few minutes ago did 
come from CIA detainees, against whom enhanced interrogation techniques have been used” (italics added). See 
Transcript from Scott Hennen Show, dated May 3, 201 1 , with former CIA Director Michael Hayden; and interview 
with Fareed Zakaria, Fareed Zakaria GPS, CNN, May 8, 2011. See also “The Waterboarding Trail to bin Laden,” 
by Michael Mukasey, Wall Street Journal, May 6, 2011. Former Attorney General Mukasey wrote: “Consider how 
the intelligence that led to bin Laden came to hand. It began with a disclosure from Khalid Sheikh Mohammed 
(KSM), who broke like a dam under the pressure of harsh interrogation techniques that included waterboarding. He 
loosed a torrent of information — including eventually the nickname of a trusted courier of bin Laden.” The CIA’s 
June 2013 Response confirms information in the Committee Study, stating: “Even after undergoing enhanced 
techniques, KSM lied about Abu Ahmad, and Abu Faraj denied knowing him.” The CIA’s September 2012 
“Lessons from the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” (DTS #2012-3826) compiled by the CIA’s Center for the Study of 
Intelligence, indicates that the CIA sought to publicly attribute the UBL operation to detainee reporting months prior 
to the execution of the operation. Under the heading, “The Public Roll-Out,” the “Lessons from the Hunt for Bin 
Ladin” document explains that the CIA’s Office of Public Affairs was “formally brought into the [UBL] operation in 
late March 2011.” The document states th at the “material OPA prepared for rele ase” was intended to “describe the 

ini' 'll in L— Hi ii ii i hi 1 1 

Page 378 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



the documents, statements, and testimony highlighting information obtained from the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, or from CIA detainees more generally, was inaccurate 
and incongruent with CIA records. 

CIA records indicate that: (I) the CIA had extensive reporting on 
Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti (variant Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti), 2138 the UBL facilitator whose 
identification and tracking led to the identification of UBL’ s compound and the operation that 
resulted in UBL’s death, prior to and independent of information from CIA detainees; (2) the 
most accurate information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti obtained from a CIA detainee was 
provided by a CIA detainee who had not yet been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques; and (3) CIA detainees who were subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques withheld and fabricated information about Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. 

Within days of the raid on UBL’s compound, CIA officials 
represented that CIA detainees provided the “tipoff” 2139 information on Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti. 2140 A review of CIA records found that the initial intelligence obtained, as well as the 



hunt and the operation,” among other matters. The document details how, prior to the operation, “agreed-upon 
language” was developed for three “vital points,” the first of which was “the critical nature of detainee reporting in 
identifying Bin Ladin’s courier.” 

2138 CIA documents and cables use various spellings, most frequently “Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti” and “Abu Ahmad 
al-Kuwaiti.” To the extent possible, the Study uses the spelling referenced in the CIA document being discussed. 

2139 Testimony from the CIA to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the Senate Armed Services 
Committee on May 4, 2011. In testimony, CIA Director Leon Panetta referenced CIA “interviews” with 12 CIA 
detainees, and stated that “I want to be able to get back to you with specifics. . .But clearly the tipoff on the couriers 
came from those interviews.” The CIA’s June 201 3 Response states: “CIA has never represented that information 
acquired through its interrogations of detainees was either the first or the only information that we had on Abu 
Ahmad.” Former CIA Director Michael Hayden provided similar public statements. See transcript of Scott Hennen 
talk-radio show, dated May 3, 2011. Hayden: “What we got, the original lead information — and frankly it was 
incomplete identity information on the couriers — began with information from CIA detainees at the black sites. And 
let me just leave it at that” (italics added). 

2140 See CIA letter to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence dated May 5, 201 1, which includes a document 
entitled, “Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” with an accompanying six-page chart 
entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” (DTS #2011-2004). 

m i 1 1 iii i mm 

Page 379 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



information the CIA identified as the most critical — or the most valuable — on Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti, 2141 was not related to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2142 



The CIA did not receive any information from CIA detainees on 
Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti until 2003. Nonetheless, by the end of 2002, the CIA was actively 
targeting Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and had collected significant reporting on Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti — to include reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti ’s close links to UBL. CIA records 
indicate that prior to receiving any information from CIA detainees, the CIA had collected: 



• Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti* s Telephonic Activity: A phone number associated with 
Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was under U.S. government intelligence collection as early as 
January 1, 2002. 2143 In March 2002, this phone number would be found in Abu Zubaydah’s 
address book under the heading “Abu Ahmad K.” 2144 In April 2002, the same phone number 
was found to be in contact with UBL family members. 2145 In June 2002, a person using the 
identified phone number and believed at the time to be “al-Kuwaiti” called a number 



2141 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the December 13, 2012, Committee Study “incorrectly characterizes 
the intelligence we had on Abu Ahmad before acquiring information on him from detainees in CIA custody as 
‘critical.’” This is incorrect. The Committee uses the CIA’s own definition of what information was important and 
critical, as conveyed to the Committee by the CIA. In documents and testimony to the Committee, the CIA 
highlighted specific information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti that the CIA viewed as especially valuable or critical to 
the identification and tracking of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. For example, in May 4, 201 1, CIA testimony, a CIA 
officer explained how “a couple of early detainees” “identi[fied]” Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti as someone close to UBL. 
The CIA officer stated: “I think the clearest way to think about this is, in 2002 a couple of early detainees, Abu 
Zubaydah and an individual, Riyadh the Facilitator, talked about the activities of an Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti. At this 
point we don’t have his true name. And they identify him as somebody involved with AQ and facilitation and some 
potential ties to bin Ladin.” As detailed in this summary, CIA records confirm that Riyadh the Facilitator provided 
information in 2002 closely linking al-Kuwaiti to UBL, but these records confirm that this information was acquired 
prior to Riyadh the Facilitator being rendered to CIA custody (the transfer occurred more than a year later, in 
January 2004). Abu Zubaydah provided no information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002. According to CIA 
records, Abu Zubaydah was not asked about Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti until July 7, 2003, when he denied knowing the 
name. As an additional example, see CIA documents and charts provided to the Committee (DTS #201 1-2004) and 
described in this summary, in which the CIA ascribes value to specific intelligence acquired on al-Kuwaiti. 

2,42 In other words, the information the CIA cited was acquired from a detainee not in CIA custody, obtained from a 
CIA detainee who was not subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, obtained from a CIA detainee 
prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, or acquired from a source unrelated to detainee 
reporting. As described, the information contained herein is based on a review of CIA Detention and Interrogation 
Program records. Although the CIA has produced more than six million pages of material associated with CIA 
detainees and the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, the Committee did not have direct access to other, 
more traditional intelligence records, to include reporting from CIA HUMINT assets, foreign government assets, 
electronic intercepts, military detainee debriefings, law enforcement derived information, and other methods of 
collection. Based on the information found in the CIA detainee-related documents, it is likely there is significant 
intelligence on “Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” acquired from a variety of intelligence collection platforms that the 
Committee did not have access to for this review. 

2142 CIArecord (“Call Details Incoming and Outgoing”) relating to calling activity for 

#■■■. A CIA document provided to the Committee onOctober 25, 2013, (DTS #2013-3152), states that the 
CIA was collecting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti i.’s phone (#H^^ft as early as November 2001, and that it was 
collection from this time that was used to make voice comparisons to later collection targeting Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti. 

2.44 CIA 

2.45 CIA 

m i ii iii i i mi mu i 

Page 380 of 499 



(03203 1Z APR 02) 
(102158Z APR 02) 



| phone number 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



associated with KSM. 2146 All of this information was acquired in 2002, prior to any 
reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti from CIA detainees. 

• Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’ s Email Communications: In July 2002, the CIA had 
obtained an email address believed to be associated with Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. 2147 As early 
as August 24, 2002, the CIA was collecting and tracking al-Kuwaiti ’s email activity. A cable 
from that day states that an email account associated with KSM “intermediary Abu Ahmed 
al-Kuwaiti” remained active in Karachi. 2148 On September 17, 2002, the CIA received 
reporting on al-Kuwaiti’ s email address from a detainee in the custody of a foreign 
government. The detainee reported that al-Kuwaiti shared an email address with Ammar al- 
Baluchi, and that al-Kuwaiti was “coordinating martyrdom operations.” 2149 When KSM was 
captured on March 1, 2003, an email address associated with al-Kuwaiti was found on a 
laptop believed to be used by KSM. 2150 All of this information was acquired prior to any 
reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti from CIA detainees. 

• A Body of Intelligence Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’ s Involvement in Operational 
Attack Planning with KSM — Including Targeting of the United States: On June 10, 2002, the 
CIA received reporting from a detainee in the custody of a foreign government indicating 
that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was engaged in operational attack planning with KSM. 2151 On 
June 25, 2002, the CIA received reporting from another detainee in the custody of a foreign 
government corroborating information that al-Kuwaiti was close with KSM, as well as 
reporting that al-Kuwaiti worked on “secret operations” with KSM prior to the September 11, 
2001, terrorist attacks. 2152 By August 9, 2002, the CIA had received reporting from a third 
detainee in the custody of a foreign government indicating that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was 
supporting KSM’s operational attack planning targeting the United States. 2153 By October 
20, 2002, the CIA had received reporting from a fourth detainee in the custody of a foreign 
government indicating that a known terrorist — Hassan Ghul — “received funding and 
instructions primarily from Abu Ahmad, a close associate of KSM.” 2154 All of this 



2146 Included in several cables and repeated in ALEC 



2147 



IUL 02). 



31049 02). The CIA’s June 2013 Response downplays the importance of the 

email address and phone numbers collected on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, stating that the accounts were later 
discontinued by Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and were “never linked” to bin Ladin’s known locations. However, on 



October 25, 2013, the CIA (DTS #2013-3152) acknowl edged that the “voice cuts” from Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti 
were acquired during this period (2001-2002) from the 



edged 

dH) phone number cited in the Committee Study. 
According t o CIA records, in February 2009 and September 2009, the voice samples collected from the Abu Ahmad 
al-Kuwaiti d^[) phone number (under collection in 2002) were compared to voice samples collected against 



|, who was geo- 



|, which led the Intelligence Community to assess that | 
located to a specific area of P akistan, was likely Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. In August 2010, Abu Ahmad | 

and tracked to the UBL compound. See intelligence chronology in Volume II for 

additional details. 

2,48 alecB 



m (240057Z AUG 02) 

2149 [RED ACTED] 64883 (171346Z SEP 02). This information was repeated in ALEC| 

2150 ALEC 

2151 



(302244Z SEP 02). 



[(102238Z MAR 03) 
19448 (101509Z JUN 02) 



DIRECTOR 



(251833Z JUN 02) 



[REDACTED] 65902 (080950Z AUG 02); ALEC 



(092204Z AUG 02) 



DIRECTOR 



M(202147Z OCT 02)_ 

T OP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 381 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



information was acquired in 2002, prior to any reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti from 
CIA detainees. 

• Significant Corroborative Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’ s Age, Physical Description, 
and Family — Including Information the CIA Would Later Cite As Pivotal: In September 
2001, the CIA received reporting on al-Kuwaiti’s family that the CIA would later cite as 
pivotal in identifying al-Kuwaiti’s true name. 2155 From January 2002 through October 2002, 
the CIA received significant corroborative reporting on al-Kuwaiti’s age, physical 
appearance, and family from detainees held in the custody of foreign governments and the 
U.S. military. 2156 All of this information was acquired prior to any reporting on Abu Ahmad 
al-Kuwaiti from CIA detainees. 

• Multiple Reports on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’ s Close Association with UBL and His Frequent 
Travel to See UBL : 2157 As early as April 2002, CIA had signals intelligence linking a phone 
number associated with al-Kuwaiti with UBL’s family, specifically al-Qa’ida member Sa’ad 
Bin Ladin. 2158 On June 5, 2002, the CIA received reporting from a detainee in the custody of 
a foreign government indicating that “Abu Ahmad” was one of three al-Qa’ida associated 
individuals — to include Sa’ad bin Ladin and KSM — who visited him. The detainee — Ridha 
al-Najjar — was a former UBL caretaker. 2159 On June 25, 2002, the CIA received reporting 
from another detainee in the custody of a foreign government — Riyadh the Facilitator — 
suggesting al-Kuwaiti may have served as a courier for UBL. Riyadh the Facilitator 



2155 See intelligence chronology in Volume n, specifically dated 17 September 2001, 

[REDACTED] 60077 (09/17/2001). See also foreign govern menU^porting from September 27, 2002, describing 
information from a detainee who was not in CIA custody (CIA (271730Z SEP 02)). That reporting is also 

highlighted in a CIA document, entitled, “Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” dated May 
4, 2011 (DTS #2011-2004). The document highlights that “Detainee Abdallah Falah al-Dusari provided what he 
thought was a partial true name for Abu Ahmad — Habib al-Rahman — whom [CIA] ultimately identified as one of 
Abu Ahmad’s deceased brothers. However, this partial true name for his brother eventually helped [CIA] map out 
Abu Ahmad’s entire family, including the true name of Abu Ahmad himself.” The CIA document did not identify 
that Abdallah Falah al-Dusari was not a CIA detainee. In June 2002, the CIA also obtained another alias for Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti — “Hamad al-Kuwaiti” — that included a component of his true name. This infonnation was 
provided by foreign government and was unrelated to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. See 

DIRECTOR ■■ (25 1 833Z JUN 02). 

2,56 See intelligence chronolog^^ including 63211 (30 JA N 2002); DIRECTOR UH 

(251 833Z JUN 02); ^■■■|||^■■I ul y 25, 2002; mill II II P"* I " t 40Z AUG 0 2); ClA^HH 

(271730Z SEP 02); I HI I l ll II 1 1 I' 1 OCT 02); 

2157 In testimony on May 4, 2011, the CIA informed the Committee that “From the beginning, CIA focused on the 
inner circle around bin Ladin, the people that were around him, as a way to try and go after bin Laden.” See DTS 



#2011-2049. 



(102158Z APR 02). Sa’ad bin Ladin was a known senior al-Qa’ida member and had been 
associated with individuals engaged in operational planning targeting the United States. See , for example, ALEC 
jmm (062040Z MAR 02) for his association with KSM operative Masran bin Arshad, who was involved in 
KSM’s “Second Wave” plotting. Phone number(s) associated with Sa’ad bin Ladin were unde r intelligence 
collection and resulted in the identification of other a l-Qa’ida targets. See 293363 (051 121Z 

II II I I^^MB'li | U i II i ^^1^0706 T41945ZJAN 04). 



[REDACTED] 1 1515, June 5, 2002. As detailed in this summary and in Volume III, Ridha al-Najjar was 
later rendered to CIA custody and subjecte^^h^CIA^senhance^ntenogation techniques. 

Illl II III I I llll Illll I 



Page 382 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



highlighted that al-Kuwaiti was “actively working in secret locations in Karachi, but traveled 
frequently” to “meet with Usama bin Ladin.” 2160 Months earlier the CIA disseminated 
signals intelligence indicating that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and Riyadh the Facilitator were in 
phone contact with each other 2161 In August 2002, another detainee in the custody of a 
foreign government with known links to al-Kuwaiti 2162 — Abu Zubair al-Ha’ili — reported that 
al-Kuwaiti “was one of a few close associates of Usama bin Ladin.” 2163 All of this 
information was acquired in 2002, prior to any reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti from 
CLA detainees. 2164 



Within a day of the UBL operation, the CI A began providing 
classified briefings to Congress on the overall operation and the intelligence that led to the raid 
and UBL’s death. 2165 On May 2, 2011, CIA officials, including CIA Deputy Director Michael 
Morell, briefed the Committee. A second briefing occurred on May 4, 2011, when CIA Director 
Leon Panetta and other CIA officials briefed both the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
and the Senate Armed Services Committee. Both of these briefings indicated that CIA detainee 
information — and the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — played a substantial role in 
developing intelligence that led to the UBL operation. The testimony contained significant 
inaccurate information. 



For example, in the May 2, 201 1, briefing, the CIA informed the 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence that: 



“However, there remained one primary line of investigation that was proving 
the most difficult to run to ground, and that was the case of a courier named 
Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti. Abu Ahmed had totally dropped off our radar in 
about the 2002-2003 time frame after several detainees in our custody had 
highlighted him as a key facilitator for bin Ladin.” 2166 



2160 See intelligence chronology in Volume IT, including DIRECTOR (251833Z JUN 02). Riyadh the 

Facilitator was eventually rendered into the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program in January 2004. CIA 
records indicate he was not subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The referenced information 
was pro vided wh ile Riyadh the Facilitator was in foreign government custody. 

2161 CIA HM (102158 Z APR 02) 

2,62 DIRECTOR (251 833Z JUN 02) 

2163 DIRECTOR (221240Z AUG 02). Abu Zubair al-Ha’ili never entered the CIA’s Detention and 

Interrogation Program. 

2164 The CIA’s June 2013 Response ignores or minimizes the extensive reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti listed in 
the text of this summary (as well as additional reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in the intelligence chronology in 
Volume II), describing this intelligence as “insufficient to distinguish Abu Ahmad from many other Bin Ladin 
associates” before crediting CIA detainees with providing “additional information” that “put [the previously 
collected reporting] into context.” While the Committee could find no internal CIA records to support the assertion 
in the CIA’s June 2013 Response, as detailed, the most detailed and accurate intelligence collected from a CIA 
detainee on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and his unique links to UBL was from Hassan Ghul, and was acquired prior to 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Ghul. 

2165 A series of public statements by members of Congress linking the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 
and the UBL operation appeared in the media during the time of the congressional briefings. The statements reflect 
the inaccurate briefings provided by the CIA. 

2166 Italics added. CIA testimony of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing on May 2, 201 1 (DTS 



#2011-1941). 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 383 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



The information above is not fully congruent with CIA records. As 
described, the CIA was targeting Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to any reporting from CIA 
detainees. Al-Kuwaiti was identified as early as 2002 as an al-Qa’ida member engaged in 
operational planning who “traveled frequently” to see UBL. 2167 No CIA detainee provided 
reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002. While CIA detainees eventually did provide some 
information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti beginning in the spring of 2003, the majority of the 
accurate intelligence acquired on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was collected outside of the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program, either from detainees not in CIA custody, or from other 
intelligence sources and methods unrelated to detainees, to include human sources and foreign 
partners. 2168 The most accurate CIA detainee-related intelligence was obtained in early 2004, 
from a CIA detainee who had not yet been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 2169 That detainee — Hassan Ghul — listed Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti as one of three 
individuals likely to be with UBL, 2170 stated that “it was well known that [UBL] was always with 
Abu Ahmed [al-Kuwaiti],” 2171 and described al-Kuwaiti as UBL’s “closest assistant,” 2172 who 
“likely handled all of UBL’s needs.” 2173 The detainee further relayed that he believed “UBL’s 
security apparatus would be minimal, and that the group likely lived in a house with a family 
somewhere in Pakistan.” 2174 



In the May 4, 201 1, briefing, CIA Director Leon Panetta provided 
the following statement to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the Senate Armed 
Services Committee (which mirrored similar statements by a “senior administration official” in a 
White House Press Briefing from May 2, 201 1) 2175 : 



“ The detainees in the post-9/1 1 period flagged for us that there were 
individuals that provided direct support to bin Ladin... and one of those 
identified was a courier who had the nickname Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. That 
was back in 2002 i ” 2 176 



2167 See intelligence chronology in Volume II. 

2168 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including ALEC 



Details Incoming and Outgoing”) relating to calling activity for 



(240057Z AUG 02); CIA record (“Call 



65902 (080950Z AUG 02); ALEC 
[REDACTED] 60077 (09/17/2001); DIRECTOR 

JUN 02). 

2169 See HEADQUARTERS ■ 
details. 



(092204Z AUG 02); 




hone number 



|; [REDACTED] 



, dated 17 September 2001 ; 



(221240Z AUG 02); and DIRECTOR 



(251833Z 



AN 04) and intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional 




AN 04) 

JAN 04) 

AN 04) 

__ AN 04) 

2174 HEADQUARTERS HHH^^^BlAN 04). UBL was eventually located in a home with a family in 
Pakistan with minimal security. 

2,75 See May 2, 201 1, 12:03AM, White House “Press Briefing by Senior Administration Officials on the Killing of 
Osama bin Laden.” The transcript, posted on the White House website (www.whitehouse.gov/the-press- 
office/201 1/5/02/press-briefing-senior-administration-officials-killing-osama-bin-laden). 

2176 Italics added. Testimony of CIA Director Panetta, transcript of the May 4, 2011, briefing of the Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence and the Senate Armed Services Committee (DTS #20 1 1-2049). 

mi 1 1 ii i i i ii ii i mi 

Page 384 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET/ / 



//N O FORN 



As previously detailed, no CIA detainees provided information on 
Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002. As such, for the statement to be accurate, it can only be a 
reference to detainees in foreign government custody who provided information in 2002. 2177 As 
noted, prior to any reporting from CIA detainees, the CIA was targeting Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti — to include al-Kuwaiti’s phone number and email address. 2178 Further, prior to 2003, 
the CIA possessed a body of intelligence reporting linking Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti to KSM and 
UBL and to operational targeting of the United States, as well as reporting that Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti was “one of a few close associates of Usama bin Ladin” 2179 and “traveled frequently” to 
“meet with Usama bin Ladin.” 2180 

In the same May 4, 2011, briefing, a CIA officer elaborated on the 
previously provided statements and provided additional detail on how “a couple of early 
detainees” “identified]” Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti as someone close to UBL: 

“I think the clearest way to think about this is, in 2002 a couple of early 
detainees, Abu Zubaydah and an individual, Riyadh the Facilitator, talked 
about the activities of an Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti. At this point we don’t have 
his true name. And they identify him as somebody involved with AQ and 
facilitation and some potential ties to bin Ladin . ” 2181 



This testimony is inaccurate. There are no CIA records of Abu 
Zubaydah discussing Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002. 2182 The first reference to Abu Zubaydah 



2177 As described in this summary, the CIA provided documents to the Committee indicating that individuals 
detained in 2002 provided “Tier One” information — linking “Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin.” The document did not 
state when the information was provided, or when the detainee entered CIA custody. Internal CIA records indicate 
that no CIA detainee provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002. See CIA six-page chart entitled, 
“Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” which lists 12 detainees in “CIA Custody^DTS #2011-2004). 

2 178 CIA re cord (“ Call Det ails Incoming and Outgoing”) relating to calling activity for HHH phone number 
#■■■ ALEC ■■ (240057Z AUG 02). 

2179 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including [REDACTED! 65902 (080950Z AUG 02); ALEC 

(092204Z AUG 02); DIRECTOR (221240Z AUG 02); and D IRECTO R (251 833Z JUN 02). 

2180 See intelligence chronology in Volume U, including DIRECTOR (251833Z JUN 02). 

2181 Italics added. CIA testimony from CIA officer [REDACTED] and transcript of the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence and the Senate Armed Services Committee briefing on May 4, 201 1. (See DTS #2011-2049.) As 
discussed in this summary and in greater detail in Volume II, the CIA provided additional information to the 
Committee on May 5, 201.1, that listed Riyadh the Facilitator as a detainee in “CIA custody,” who was “detained 
February 2002,” and provided the referenced information. The CIA document omitted that Riyadh the Facilitator 
was not in CIA custody when he provided the referenced information in June 2002. Riyadh the Facilitator was not 
rendered to CIA custody until January 2004. See Volume III and DTS #2011-2004. 

2,82 The CIA’s June 2013 Response does not address the Committee Study finding that Abu Zubaydah did not 
provide reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002. However, on October 25, 2013, the CIA responded in writing 
that the December 13, 2012, Committee Study was correct, and confirmed that the “first report from Abu Zubaydah 
discussing Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was in 2003.” (See DTS #2013-3152.) As described in the intelligence 
chronology in Volume II, on June 13, 2002, the CIA’s ALEC Station sent a cable requesting that Abu Zubaydah be 
questioned regarding his knowledge of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, whom the CIA believed was then in Pakistan. 
Despite this reque st, CIA r ecords indicate that Abu Zubaydah was not asked about Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti at this 
time. (See ALEC (1301 17Z JUN 02).) Days later, on June 18, 2002, Abu Zubaydah was placed in 

isolation, without any questioning or contact. On August 4, 2002, the CIA resumed contact and immediately began 
using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah, including the waterboard. CIA records 
indicate that Abu Zubaydah was not asked about Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti until Ju ly 7, 2003, when he denied 
mi M ill I 1 1' >l' HIM' 

Page 385 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SE€RET W 



//NOFOR N 



providing information related to al-Kuwaiti is on July 7, 2003, when Abu Zubaydah denied 
knowing the name. 2183 CIA records indicate that the information in 2002 that the CIA has 
represented as the initial lead information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was not obtained from the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, but was collected by the CIA from other 
intelligence sources, including from detainees in foreign government custody. Riyadh the 
Facilitator provided substantial information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002, including 
information suggesting al-Kuwaiti may have served as a courier, as al-Kuwaiti reportedly 
“traveled frequently” to see UBL. 2184 Consistent with the testimony, CIA records indicate that 
the information provided by Riyadh the Facilitator was important information; however, Riyadh 
the Facilitator was not in CIA custody in 2002, but was in the custody of a foreign 
government. 2185 Riyadh the Facilitator was not transferred to CIA custody until January |, 
2004. 2186 As noted, in 2002, the CIA received additional reporting from another detainee in the 
custody of a foreign government, Abu Zubair al-Ha’ili, that “Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” was “one of a 
few close associates of Usama bin Ladin ” 2187 



At the May 4, 201 1, briefing, a Senator asked, “I guess what we’re 
trying to get at here, or certainly I am, was any of this information obtained through [enhanced] 
interrogation measures?” A CIA officer replied: 



“Senator, these individuals were in our program and were subject to some 
form of enhanced interrogation . Because of the time involved and the 
relationship to the information and the fact that I’m not a specialist on that 
program, I would ask that you allow us to come back to you with some 
detail.” 2188 



The information above is not fully congruent with CIA records. As 
is detailed in the intelligence chronology in Volume II, the vast majority of the intelligence 





knowing the name. ( See HHi 12236 (072032Z JUL 03).) As is detailed in the intelligence chronology in 
Volume II, on April 3, 2002, the CIA sent a cable stating that on page 8 of a 27-page address book found with Abu 
Zubaydah, there was the name “ Abu Ahm ad K.” with a phone number that was found to be already under U.S. 
intelligenc^ollection. See CIA (03203 IZ APR 02). 

2183 1 2236 (07 2032Z JUL 03) 

2.84 DIRECTOR (251833Z JUN 02) 

2.85 RiyadhtheFacilitator, aka Sharqawi Ali Abdu al- Hajj, was ca ptured on February 7, 2002. ( See 

10480 FEB 02).) Al-Hajj was transferred to HUH custody on February 2002. 

18265 FEB 02).) On January |, 2004, al-Hajj was rendered to CIA custody. ( See \ 

|_JAN 04y)Al-Haiiwastransferred to U.S. military custody on May 
1335 HHHHHI- 

1591^^(^^BJAN04). Documents provided to the Committee on “detainee 
reporting” related to the UBL operation (incorrectly) indicate that Riyadh the Facilitator was in CIA custody. See 
May 5, 201 1, six^ag^IA chart entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti”(DTS #2011-2004). 

2187 DIRECTOR (221240Z AUG 02). Abu Zubair al-Ha’ili never entered the CIA’s Detention and 

Interrogation Program. 

2188 Italics added. CIA testimony from CIA officer [REDACTED] and transcript of the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence and the Senate Armed Services Committee briefing on May 4, 201 1 (DTS #2011-2049). The CIA 
subsequently provided the Committee with a letter dated May 5, 2011, which included a document entitled, 
“Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” with an accompanying six-page chart entitled, 
“Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” (DTS #2011-2004). See also a similar, but less detailed CIA 
document entitled, “Detainee Reporting o n Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’ s Historic Li nks to Usama Bin Laden.” 

mil l | | III | m 

Page 386 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



acquired on Abu Ahmad al- Kuwaiti was originally acquired from sources unrelated to the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program, and the most accurate information acquired from a CIA 
detainee was provided prior to the CIA subjecting the detainee to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 2189 As detailed in CIA records, and acknowledged by the CIA in 
testimony, information from CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques — to include CIA detainees who had clear links to Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti based on a 
large body of intelligence reporting — provided fabricated, inconsistent, and generally unreliable 
information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti throughout their detention 2190 



2.89 On May 5, 2004, the CIA provided several documents to the Committee, including a chart entitled, “Detainee 
Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” described in this summary. For additional details, see intelligence 
chronology in Volume II. 

2.90 Below are specific details on the reporting of Abu Zubaydah, KSM, Khallad bin Attash, Ammar al-Baluchi, and 

Abu Faraj al-Libi related to Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti: 1) Abu Zubaydah was captured on March 28, 2002 , with a 27- 
page address book that included a phone number for “Abu Ahmad K,” which matched a mobile 

phone number that was already under intelligence collection by the U.S. Intelligence Community. (As early as July 

2002, the CIA associated the phone number with al-Kuwaiti.) As detailed in the Study, Abu Zubaydah provided 
significant intelligence, primarily to FBI special agents, from the time of his capture on March 28, 2002, through 
June 18, 2002, when he was placed in isolation for 47 days. On June 1 3, 2002, less than a week before he was 
placed in isolation, CIA Headquarters requested that interrogators ask Abu Zubaydah about his knowledge of Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, who was believed to be in Pakistan, according to the request from CIA Headquarters. There are 
no CIA records indicating that the interrogators asked Abu Zubaydah about al-Kuwaiti. Instead, as described, Abu 
Zubaydah was placed in isolation beginning on June 18, 2002, with the FBI and CIA interrogators departing the 
detention site. The FBI did not return. On August 4, 2002, CIA interrogators reestablished contact with Abu 
Zubaydah and immediately began to subject Abu Zubaydah to the non-stop use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques for 17 days, which included at least 83 applications of the CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique. 
According to CIA records, Abu Zubaydah was not asked about Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti until July 7, 2003, when he 
denied knowing the name. On April 27, 2004, Abu Zubaydah again stated that he did not recognize the name “Abu 
Ahmed al-Kuwaiti.” In August 2005, Abu Zubaydah speculated on an individual the CIA stated might be 
“identifiable with Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, aka Abu Ahmad al-Pakistani,” but Abu Zubaydah stated the person in 
question was not close with UBL. 2) KSM was captured on March 1, 2003, during a raid in Pakistan. An email 
address associated with Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was found on a laptop that was assessed to be associated with KSM. 
Once rendered to CIA custody on March 2003, KSM was immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, which continued through March 25, 2003, and included at least 183 applications of the 
CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique. On March 5, 2003, KSM provided information concerning a senior al- 
Qa’ida member named “Abu Khalid,” whom KSM later called “Abu Ahmad al-Baluchi.” The information KSM 
provided could not be corroborated by other intelligence collected by the CIA, and KSM provided no further 
information on the individual. On May 5, 2003, KSM provided his first information on an individual named “Abu 
Ahmed al-Kuwaiti” when he was confronted with reporting from a detainee not in CIA custody, Masran bin Arshad. 
KSM confirmed bin Arshad’ s reporting regarding Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, specifically that bin Arshad was 
originally tasked by KSM to get money from Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in Pakistan. KSM further relayed that Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti worked with Hassan Ghul helping to move families from Afghanistan to Pakistan. On May 22, 

2003, KSM was specifically asked about a UBL courier named Abu Ahmed. KSM again described a courier for 
UBL whose name was Abu Ahmed al-Baluchi, but noted that this Abu Ahmed was more interested in earning 
money than in serving al-Qa’ida. According to KSM, Abu Ahmed was working with Hassan Ghul in April or May 
2002, but speculated that Abu Ahmed was in Iran as of early March 2003. In July 2003, KSM stated that Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti worked with Abu Zubaydah’s group prior to September 2001 and later with Abu Sulayman al- 
Jaza’iri. In September 2003, KSM was confronted with reporting from another detainee in foreign government 
custody on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. KSM confirmed that he had told Hambali to work with Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti 
as he transited Pakistan, but KSM downplayed al-Kuwaiti’ s importance, claiming to have contacted Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti only three to four times when he was in Peshawar and stating that Abu Ahmad worked “primarily with 
lower level members” and appeared to have a higher status than he actually had in al-Qa’ida because KSM relied on 
al-Kuwaiti for travel facilitation. In January 2004, based on statements made by Hassan Ghul — provided prior to the 



Page 387 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE G RE¥// 



//NOFORN 



use of the CIA’s enhanced inteiTogation techniques — that it was “well known” that UBL was always with al- 
Kuwaiti, CIA Headquarters asked CIA interrogators to reengage KSM on the relationship between al-Kuwaiti and 
UBL, noting the “serious disconnect” between Ghul’s reporting linking UBL and Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and 
KSM’s “pithy” description of al-Kuwaiti. CIA Headquarters wrote that unlike Hassan Ghul, KSM had made “no 
reference to a link between Abu Ahmed and al-Qa’ida’s two top leaders” and that KSM “has some explaining to do 
about Abu Ahmed and his support to UBL and Zawahiri.” On May 31, 2004, KSM claimed that al-Kuwaiti was 
“not very senior, nor was he wanted,” noting that al-Kuwaiti could move about freely, and might be in Peshawar. In 
August 2005, KSM stated that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was not a courier and that he had never heard of Abu Ahmad 
transporting letters for UBL. Instead, KSM claimed that al-Kuwaiti was focused on family after he married in 2002. 
3) Khallad bin Attash was arrested with Ammar al-Baluchi in a unilateral operation by Pakistani authorities resulting 
from criminal leads on April 29, 2003. On May 2003, he was rendered to CIA custody and immediately 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from May 16, 2003, to May 18, 2003, and then again from 
July 18, 2003, to July 29, 2003. On June 30, 2003, bin Attash stated that al-Kuwaiti was admired among the men. 

On July 27, 2003, bin Attash corroborated intelligence reporting that al-Kuwaiti played a facilitation role in al- 
Qa’ida and that al-Kuwaiti departed Karachi to get married. In January 2004, bin Attash stated that al-Kuwaiti was 
not close to UBL and not involved in al-Qa’ida operations, and that al-Kuwaiti was settling down with his wife in 
the summer of 2003. In August 2005, bin Attash stated that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was not a courier, that he had 
never heard of Abu Ahmad transporting letters for UBL, and that Abu Ahmad was instead focused on family after 
he married in 2002. In August 2006, bin Attash reiterated that al-Kuwaiti was not a courier, but rather focused on 
family life. 4) Ammar al-Baluchi was arrested with Khallad bin Attash in a unilateral operation by Pakistani 
authorities resulting from criminal leads on April 29, 2003. Upon his arrest, Ammar al-Baluchi was cooperative and 
provided information on a number of topics while in foreign government custody, including information on Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti that the CIA disseminated prior to al-Baluchi being transferred to CIA custody on May 2003. 
After Ammar al-Baluchi was transferred to CIA custody, the CIA subjected Ammar al-Baluchi to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques from May 17, 2003, to May 20, 2003. On May 19, 2003, al-Baluchi stated he 
fabricated information while being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques the previous day, but in 
response to questioning, stated that he believed UBL was on the Pakistan/Afghanistan border and that a brother of 
al-Kuwaiti was to take over courier duties for UBL. In June 2003, al-Baluchi stated that there were rumors that al- 
Kuwaiti was a courier. In January 2004, al-Baluchi retracted previous reporting, stating that al-Kuwaiti was never a 
courier and would not have direct contact with UBL or Ayman al-Zawahiri because “unlike someone like Abu Faraj, 
[al-Kuwaiti] was too young and didn’t have much experience or credentials to be in that position.” In May 2004, al- 
Baluchi stated that al-Kuwaiti may have worked for Abu Faraj al-Libi. 5) Abu Faraj al-Libi was captured in 
Pakistan on May 2, 2005. On May 2005, Abu Faraj al-Libi was rendered to CIA custody. Abu Faraj al-Libi was 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from May 28, 2005, to June 2, 2005, and again from June 
17, 2005, to June 28, 2005. It was not until July 12, 2005, that CIA Headquarters sent a set of “Tier Three 
Requirements Regarding Abu Ahmad Al-Kuwaiti” to the detention site holding Abu Faraj al-Libi. Prior to this, 
interrogators had focused their questioning of Abu Faraj on operational plans, as well as information on senior al- 
Qa’ida leadership, primarily Hamza Rab’ia and Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. On July 13, 2005, Abu Faraj al-Libi denied 
knowledge of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, or any of his aliases. On July 15, 2005, CIA Headquarters noted they did not 
believe Abu Faraj was being truthful and requested CIA debriefers confront Abu Faraj again regarding his 
relationship with al-Kuwaiti. CIA records indicate that CIA debriefers did not respond to this request. On August 
12, 2005, having received no response to its previous request, CIA Headquarters again asked Abu Faraj’s debriefers 
to readdress the issue of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. CIA analysts noted that they “[found Faraj’s] denials of even 
recognizing his name difficult to believe,” and suggested that “one possible reason why [Faraj] lied about not 
recognizing Abu Ahmad’s name] is [an attempt] to protect him - leading us to request that base readdress this issue 
with [Faraj] on a priority basis.” Two days later, on August 14, 2005, after being questioned again about Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, Abu Faraj al-Libi “swore to God” that he did not know al-Kuwaiti, or anybody who went by any 
of his aliases, insisting he would never forget anybody who worked for him. Abu Faraj did suggest, however, that 
an “Ahmad al-Pakistani” had worked with Marwan al-Jabbur to care for families in the Lahore, Pakistan, area, but 
said he (Abu Faraj) had no relationship with this al-Pakistani. On August 17, 2005, CIA Headquarters requested 
that debriefers reengage certain detainees on the role of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. In response, KSM and Khallad bin 
Attash claimed that al-Kuwaiti was not a courier and that they had never heard of Abu Ahmad transporting letters 
for UBL. KSM and Khallad bin Attash claimed that al-Kuwaiti was focused on family after he married in 2002. 
However, Ammar al-Baluchi indicated that ^alJCuwaitMvorkedforAb^ in 2002. A September 1, 2005, 

TOP 

Page 388 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 





; ) At the May 4, 201 1, briefing, a Senator asked, “of the people that 



you talked about as detainees that were interrogated, which of those were waterboarded and did 
they provide unique intelligence in order to make this whole mission possible?” 2191 CIA Director 



Panetta responded: 



“I want to be able to get back to you with specifics, but right now we think 
there were about 12 detainees that were intennewed, 2192 and about three of 
them were probably subject to the waterboarding process 2193 Now what came 
from those interviews, how important was it, I really do want to stress the fact 
that we had a lot of streams of intelligence here that kind of tipped us off there, 
but we had imagery, we had assets on the ground, we had information that 
came from a number of directions in order to piece this together. But clearly 
the tipoff 2194 on the couriers came from those interviews .” 2195 

As previously detailed, the “tipoff’ on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 
2002 did not come from the interrogation of CIA detainees and was obtained prior to any CIA 
detainee reporting. The CIA was already targeting Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and collecting 
intelligence on at least one phone number and an email address associated with al-Kuwaiti in 
2002. 2196 No CIA detainee provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 2002, and prior 
to receiving any information from CIA detainees, the CIA possessed a body of intelligence 
reporting linking Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti to KSM and UBL and to operational targeting of the 
United States, as well as reporting that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was “one of a few close 



CIA report states that Abu Faraj al-Libi identified an “Abu ‘Abd al Khaliq Jan,” as his “go-between with Bin Ladin 
since mid-2003,” but there was no other CIA reporting to support this assertion. In May 2007, a CIA targeting study 
concluded that the reporting from KSM and Abu Faraj al-Libi was “not credible,” and “their attempts to downplay 
Abu Ahmad’s importance or deny knowledge of Abu Ahmad are likely part of an effort to withhold information on 
UBL or his close associates.” A September 28, 2007, CIA report concluded that “Abu Faraj was probably the last 
detainee to maintain contact with UBL — possibly through Abu Ahmad,” but noted that “Abu Faraj vehemently 
denied any knowledge of Abu Ahmad.” See intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional details. 

2191 Italics added. 

2192 Italics added. For a listing of the 12 detainees, see CIA’s six-page chart entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” which lists 1 2 detainees, all of whom are listed as being in “CIA Custody” (DTS #201 1 -2004). 

2193 Italics added. CIA records indicate that none of the three CIA detainees known to have been subjected by the 
CIA to the waterboard interrogation technique provided unique intelligence on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. To the 
contrary, there is significant evidence that two of the three detainees — Abu Zubaydah and KSM — failed to provide 
accurate information likely known to them about Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and/or fabricated information to protect al- 
Kuwaiti. The third CIA detainee known to have been subjected to the CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique, 
‘Abd al -Rahim al-Nashiri, provided no information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. See intelligence chronology in 
Volume II for additional information. 



2194 Italics added. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “CIA has never represented that information acquired 
through its interrogations of detainees was either the first or the only information that we had on Abu Ahmad.” 
2193 Italics added. CIA testimony from CIA Director Panetta, and transcript of the Senate Select Committee on 



Intelligence and the Senate Armed Services Committee, May 4, 2011 (DTS #201 1-2049). 
2 196 CIA re cord (“ Call Det ails Incoming and Outgoing”) relating to calling activity for 
#^HK ALEC ■■ (240057Z AUG 02). 



Page 389 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



associates of Usama bin Ladin” 2197 and “traveled frequently” to “meet with Usama bin 
Ladin.” 2198 

The day after the classified briefing, on May 5, 201 1, the CIA 
provided the Committee with a six-page chart entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti,” which accompanied a one-page document compiled by the CIA’s CTC, entitled 
“Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti.” 2199 In total, the CIA chart 
identifies 25 “mid- value and high-value detainees” who “discussed Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’ s 
long-time membership in al-Qa’ida and his historic role as courier for Usama Bin Ladin.” The 
25 detainees are divided into two categories. The chart prominently lists 12 detainees — all 
identified as having been in CIA custody — “who linked Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin,” which the 
CIA labeled as the most important, “Tier 1” information. The document states that nine of the 
12 (9/12: 75 percent) CIA detainees providing “Tier 1” information were subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, and that of those nine detainees, two (2/9: 20 percent) were 
subjected to the CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique. The chart then includes a list of 13 
detainees “who provided general information on Abu Ahmad,” labeled as “Tier 2” information. 
The CIA document states that four of the 13 (4/13: 30 percent) “Tier 2” detainees were in CIA 
custody and that all four (4/4: 100 percent) “CIA detainees” were subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 2200 



On October 3, 2012, the CIA provided the Committee with a 
document entitled, “Lessons for the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” completed in September 2012 by the 



2197 See intelligence chronology in Volume n, including CIA recorcH“Call Details Incoming and Outgoing”) relating 
to calling activity for Hl^flVphone number #HH; ALECBMB(240057Z AUG 02); [REDACTED] 65902 
(080950Z AUG 02); ALECHHI (092204Z AUG02); ^^^^^■■dated 17 Septembe r 2001; 
[REDACTED] 60077 (09/17/2001); DIRECTOR ■■ (221240Z AUG 02); and DIRECTOR ■■ (251833Z 
JUN 02). 

2198 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including DIRECTOR 111^1 (251833Z JUN 02). As described 
above, Riyadh the Facilitator was eventually rendered into the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program in 
January 2004, but CIA records indicate he was not subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The 
referenced information was provided in June 2002, while Riyadh the Facilitator was not in U.S. custody, but in the 
custody of a foreign government. 

2199 Senator McCain and other members requested information on the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques in the UBL operation at the previous day’s hearing and the CIA committed to provide additional 
information to the members. Senator McCain: “I’m also interested in this whole issue of the ‘enhanced 
interrogation,’ what role it played. Those who want to justify torture seem to have grabbed hold of this as some 
justification for our gross violation of the Geneva Conventions to which we are signatory. I’d be very interested in 
having that issue clarified. I think it’s really important.” See transcript of the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence and the Senate Armed Services Committee briefing on May 4, 201 1 (DTS #2011-2049). 

2200 See CIA letter to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence dated May 5, 2011, which includes a document 
entitled, “Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” with an accompanying six-page chart 
entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” (DTS #2011-2004). See also a similar, but less detailed 
CIA document entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’s Historic Links to Usama Bin Laden.” 

The CIA’s September 2012 “Lessons from the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” compiled by the CIA’s Center for the Study of 
Intelligence ( See DTS #2012-3826), appears to utilize the same inaccurate information, stating: “In sum, 25 
detainees provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, his al-Qa’ida membership, and his historic role as a 
courier for Bin Ladin. Nine of the 25 were held by foreign governments. Of the 16 held in CIA custody, all but 
three had given information after being subjected to enhanced interrogation techniques (EITs), although of the 13 
only two (KSM and Abu Zubaydah) had been waterboarded” (italics added). As described, the information in this 
CIA “lessons” report is inaccurate. 

mi ji iii i " mm 

Page 390 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



CIA’s Center for the Study of Intelligence. The CIA Lessons Learned document states, “fi]n 
sum, 25 detainees provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, his al-Qa’ida membership, 
and his historic role as a courier for Bin Ladin.” The CIA document then states that 16 of the 25 
detainees who reported on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti were in CIA custody, and that “[o]f the 16 
held in CIA custody, all but three [13] had given information after being subjected to enhanced 
interrogation techniques (EITs),” before noting that “only two (KSM and Abu Zubaydah) had 
been waterboarded .” 2201 

A review of CIA records found that these CIA documents 
contained inaccurate information and omitted important and material facts. 

• The May 5, 2011, CIA chart represents that all 12 detainees (12/12: 100 percent) providing 
“Tier 1 ” intelligence — information that “linked Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin” 2202 — were 
detainees in CIA custody. A review of CIA records found that the CIA document omitted the 
fact that five of the 12 listed detainees (5/12: 41 percent) provided intelligence on Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to entering CIA custody. 2203 In addition, other detainees — not in 
CIA custody — provided information that “linked Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin,” but were not 
included in the CIA list. For example, the first detainee-related information identified in CIA 
records indicating a close relationship between UBL and Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was 
acquired in July 2002, from a detainee in the custody of a foreign government, Abu Zubair 
al-Ha’ili (Zubair). According to CIA records, Zubair provided a detailed physical description 
of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, information on Abu Ahmad’s family, his close connection to 
KSM, and that “Ahmad al-Kuwaiti: was a one of a few close associates of Usama bin 
Ladin.” 2204 This information would be used to question other detainees, but was omitted in 
the CIA’s “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti” chart. 

• The May 5, 2011, CIA chart also states that nine of the 12 (9/12: 75 percent) “CIA 
detainees” providing “ Tier 1 ” intelligence were subjected to the CIA ’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. A review of CIA records found that of the nine detainees the CIA 
identified as having been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and 
providing “Tier 1” information on links between Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti and UBL, five of 
the 9 (5/9: 55 percent) provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to being 

2201 Italics added. “Lessons from the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” dated September 2012, compiled by the CIA’s Center for 
the Study of Intelligence, and provided on October 3, 2012 (DTS #2012-3826). 

2202 The CIA document identified “Tier 1” intelligence as information that “linked Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin,” but 
inaccurately included CIA detainees under the “Tier 1” detainee reporting list who did not provide information 
linking “Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin.” For example, the CIA identified Abu Zubaydah and KSM as providing “Tier 
1” intelligence that “linked Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin,” despite both detainees denying any significant connection 
between al-Kuwaiti and UBL. 

2203 Riyadh the Facilitator (information on June 25, 2002 [prior to CIA custody]; CIA custody January |, 2004), 
Ammar al-Baluchi (information on May 6, 2003 [prior to CIA custody]; CIA custody Ma^|, 2003), Ahmed 
Ghailani (information on August 1, 2004 [prior to CIA custody]; CIA custody September 2004), Sharif al-Masri 
(information on September 16, 2004 [prior to CIA custody]; CIA custody September 2004), and Muhammad 
Rahim (information on July 2, 2007 [prior to CIA custody]; CIA custody July 2007). There are reports that a 
sixth detainee, Hassan Ghul, also provided extensive information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to being 
transferred to CI A custod y. See intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional information. 

2204 DIRECTOR ■■ (221240Z AUG 02) 




Page 391 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N OFORN 



subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2205 This information was omitted 
from the CIA document. Of the remaining four detainees who did not provide information 
on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti until after being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, three were not substantially questioned on any topic prior to the CIA’s use of 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 2206 All three provided information the CIA assessed to be 
fabricated and intentionally misleading. 2207 The fourth, Abu Zubaydah, who was detained on 
March 28, 2002, and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques in August 
2002, to include the waterboard technique, did not provide information on Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti until August 25, 2005, intelligence that was described by CIA officers at the time as 
“speculative.” 2208 These relevant details were omitted from the CIA documents. 2209 

• The May 5, 2011, CIA chart also states that of the 13 detainees “who provided general 
information on Abu Ahmad, ” labeled as “Tier 2 ” information, four of the 13 (4/13: 30 
percent ) detainees were in CIA custody and that all four (4/4: 100 percent) were subjected to 
the CIA's enhanced interrogation techniques. 2210 A review of CIA records found the CIA 
document omitted that two of the four (2/4: 50 percent) “CIA detainees” who were described 
as subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques provided intelligence on Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to entering CIA custody, and therefore prior to being subjected to 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2211 Finally, there were additional detainees in 



2205 Ammar al-Baluchi, Hassan Ghul, Ahmad Ghailani, Sharif al-Masri, and Muhammad Rahim. 

2206 Khalid Shaykh Mohammad, Khalid bin Attash, and Abu Faraj al-Libi. 

2207 Khalid Shaykh Mohammad, Abu Faraj al-Libi, and Khalid bin Attash. See intelligence chronology in Volume II 

and CIA testimony from May 4, 2011. CIA officer: .with the capture of Abu Faraj al-Libi and Khalid Shaykh 

Mohammed, these are key bin Ladin facilitators, gatekeepers if you will, and their description of Abu Ahmed, the 
sharp contrast between that and the earlier detainees. Abu Faraj denies even knowing him, a completely uncredible 
position for him to take but one that he has stuck with to this day. KSM initially downplays any role Abu Ahmed 
might play, and by the time he leaves our program claims that he married in 2002, retired and really was playing no 
role.” CIA records indicate Khallad bin Attash also downplayed the role of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, stating several 
times that Abu Ahmad was focused on family and was not close to UBL, and that he had never heard of Abu Ahmad 
al-Kuwaiti serving as a courier for UBL. 



2208 DIRECTOR (8/25/2005). On July 7, 2003, and April 27, 2004, Abu Zubaydah was asked about “Abu 
Ahmed al-Kuwaiti” and denied knowing the name. 

2209 See CIA letter to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence dated May 5, 2011, which includes a document 
entitled, “Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” with an accompanying six-page chart 
entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” (DTS #201 1-2004). See also a similar, but less detailed 
CIA document entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’s Historic Links to Usama Bin Laden.” See 
intelligence chronology in Volume II for additional details. 

2210 See CIA letter to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence dated May 5, 2011, which includes a document 
entitled, “Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” with an accompanying six-page chart 
entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” (DTS #2011-2004). See also a similar, but less detailed 
CIA document entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’s Historic Links to Usama Bin Laden.” 

The CIA’s September 2012 “Lessons from the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” compiled by the CIA’s Center for the Study of 
Intelligence (DTS #2012-3826), appears to utilize the same inaccurate information, stating: “In sum, 25 detainees 
provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, his al-Qa’ida membership, and his historic role as a courier for Bin 
Ladin. Nine of the 25 were held by foreign governments. Of the 16 held in CIA custody, all but three had given 
information after being subjected to enhanced interrogation techniques (EITs)...” (italics added). As described, the 
information in this CIA “Lessons Learned” report is inaccurate. 

2211 Ridha al-Najjar/al-Tunisi, who was detained in May 2002, first provided intelligence on al-Kuwaiti on June 4/5 

2002, and was subsequently transferred to Cl^ustodyonJun^ to the CIA’s enhanced 

1 1 ii 1 M if 1 1 i n u i m 1 1 

Page 392 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



//N O FORN 



foreign government custody “who provided general information on Abu Ahmad” that were 
not included in the list of 13 detainees. For example, in January 2002, the CIA received 
reporting from a detainee in the custody of a foreign government who provided a physical 
description of a Kuwaiti named Abu Ahmad who attended a terrorist training camp. 2212 

• The October 3, 2012, “Lessons for the Hunt for Bin Ladin ” document states that "[ i]n sum, 
25 detainees provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, his al-Qa’ida membership, 
and his historic role as a courier for Bin Ladin. ” This is incorrect. As described, additional 
detainees — not in CIA custody — provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, including 
2002 reporting that al-Kuwaiti “was one of a few close associates of Usama bin Ladin.” 2213 

• The October 3, 2012, “Lessons for the Hunt for Bin Ladin ” document also states that 16 of 
the 25 (16/25: 65 percent ) detainees who reported on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti were in CIA 
custody. This is incorrect. At least seven of the 16 detainees (7/16: 45 percent) that the CIA 
listed as detainees in CIA custody provided reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to 
being transferred to CIA custody. 2214 

• The October 3, 2012, “Lessons for the Hunt for Bin Ladin ” document also states that “[ o]f 
the 16 held in CIA custody, all but three [13] had given information after being subjected to 
enhanced interrogation techniques (EITs). ” 2 215 This is incorrect. Seven of the 13 detainees 
that the CIA listed as having been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
provided information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to being subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 2216 Of the remaining six detainees who did not provide 
information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti until after being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, five were not substantially questioned on any topic prior to the 
CIA’s use of enhanced interrogation techniques. 2217 (Of the five detainees, three provided 
information the CIA assessed to be fabricated and intentionally misleading. 2218 The 



interrogation techniques in October 2002. Hambali, who was detained on August 1 1 , 2003, first provided 
information on al-Kuwaiti on August 13, 2003. Later, Hambali was rendered to CIA custody on August | 



2003. 



See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including 



63211 (30 JAN 2002). 



DIRECTOR 



(221240Z AUG 02) 



22,4 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including reporting from Riyadh the Facilitator, Ammar al-Baluchi, 
Ahmad Ghailani, Sharif al-Masri, Muhammad Rahim, Ridha al-Najjar/al-Tunisi, and Hambali. As detailed, a 
former CIA officer stated publicly that Hassan Ghul provided reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti prior to being 
transferred to CIA custody. 

2215 “Lessons from the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” dated September 2012, compiled by the CIA’s Center for the Study of 
Intelligence, and provided on October 3, 2012 (DTS #2012-3826). 

2216 See intelligence chronology in Volume II, including reporting from Ammar al-Baluchi, Ahmad Ghailani, Sharif 
al-Masri, Muhammad Rahim, Ridha al-Najjar/al-Tunisi, Hambali, and Hassan Ghul. 

2217 Khalid Shaykh Mohammad, Khalid bin Attash, Abu Yasir al-Jaza’iri, Samir al-Barq, and Abu Faraj al-Libi. 

2218 Khalid Shaykh Mohammad, Abu Faraj al-Libi, and Khalid bin Attash. See intelligence chronology in Volume 11 
and CIA testimony from May 4, 2011. CIA officer: “...with the capture of Abu Faraj al-Libi and Khalid Shaykh 
Mohammed, these are key bin Ladin facilitators, gatekeepers if you will, and their description of Abu Ahmed, the 
sharp contrast between that and the earlier detainees. Abu Faraj denies even knowing him, a completely uncredible 
position for him to take but one that he has stuck with to this day. KSM initially downplays any role Abu Ahmed 
might play, and by the time he leaves our program claims that he married in 2002, retired and really was playing no 
role.” CIA records indicate Khallad bin A ttash also downplayed the role of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, stating several 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi mu i 

Page 393 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE C RET// 



//NOF O RN 



remaining two provided limited, non-unique, corroborative reporting. 2219 ) The sixth, Abu 
Zubaydah, who was detained on March 28, 2002, and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques in August 2002, did not provide information on Abu Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti until August 25, 2005, intelligence that, as noted, was described by CIA officers at 
the time as “speculative.” 2220 

• The October 3, 2012, “ Lessons for the Hunt for Bin Ladin” document also states that “ only 
two [ detainees ] (KSM and Abu Zubaydah) had been waterboarded. Even so, KSM gave false 
information about Abu Ahmad.... ” 2221 The CIA ’s May 5, 2011, Chart, “Reporting on Abu 
Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, ” states that Abu Zubaydah and KSM provided “Tier 1 ” intelligence that 
“linked Abu Ahmad to Bin Ladin. ” CIA records indicate that both detainees denied any 
significant connection between al-Kuwaiti and UBL. CIA records further indicate that Abu 
Zubaydah and KSM, who were both subjected to the CIA’s waterboard interrogation 
technique, withheld information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti: 

o Abu Zubaydah: “Abu Ahmad K.” and a phone number associated with Abu Ahmad 
al-Kuwaiti was found on page 8 of a 27-page address book captured with Abu 
Zubaydah on March 28, 2002. In July 2003, Abu Zubaydah stated that he was not 
familiar with the name Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, or the description provided to him by 
CIA officers. In April 2004, Abu Zubaydah again stated that he did not recognize the 
name “Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti.” 2222 According to a CIA cable, in August 2005, Abu 
Zubaydah provided information on “an individual whose name he did not know, but 
who might be identifiable with Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti, aka Abu Ahmad al- 
Pakistani.” According to the cable, Abu Zubaydah speculated that this individual 
knew UBL and al-Zawahiri, but did not think their relationship would be close. Days 
later a CIA cable elaborated that Abu Zubaydah had speculated on a family of 
brothers from Karachi that may have included Abu Ahmad. 2223 



times that Abu Ahmad was focused on family and was not close to UBL, and that he had never heard of Abu Ahmad 
al-Kuwaiti serving as a courier for UBL. 

2219 Abu Yasir al-Jaza’iri provided corroborative information in July 2003 that Abu Ahmad al-Kuw aiti was 
associated with KSM, was best known in Karachi, and appeared to be Pakistani. ( See DIRECTOR EHHI 
(1 1 1632Z JUL 03).) Samir al-Barq provided information in September 2003 that al-Kuwaiti had pr ovided al -Barq 
with $1000 to obtain a house in Karachi that al-Qa’ida could use for a biological weapons lab. (See 47409 

(191324Z NOV 03), as well as the detainee review of Samir al-Barq in Volume III that details al-Barq’s various 
statements on al-Qa’ida’s ambition to establish a biological weapons program.) Neither of these reports is cited in 
CIA records as providing unique or new information. In October 2003, both detainees denied having any 



information on the use of Abbottabad as a safe haven for al-Qa’ida. See \ 
wmm 48444 (240942Z OCT 03). 



10172 (I60821Z OCT 03); 



2220 



DIRECTOR (8/25/2005). On July 7, 2003, and April 27, 2004, Abu Zubaydah was asked about “Abu 
Ahmed al-Kuwaiti” and denied knowing the name. 

2221 “Lessons from the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” dated September 2012, compiled by the CIA’s Center for the Study of 
Intelligence, and provided on October 3, 2012 (DTS #2012-3826). 

2222 In addition to “Abu Ahmad K.” being included in Abu Zubaydah’ s address book, there was additional reporting 
indicating that Abu Zubaydah had some knowledge of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. For example, on October 12, 2004, 
another CIA detainee explained how he met al-Kuwaiti at a guesthouse that was operated by Ibn Shaykh al-Libi and 
Abu Zubaydah in 1997. See intelligence chronology in Volume II. 



2223 



See DIRECTOR (252024Z AUCK)5UirKHh^ntelliM in Volume II. 

T OP 

Page 394 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O F O R N 



o KSM: When KSM was captured on March 1, 2003, an email address associated with 
Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was found on a laptop believed to be used by KSM. As 
detailed in this review, KSM first acknowledged Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in May 
2003, after being confronted with reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti from a 
detainee who was not in CIA custody. KSM provided various reports on Abu Ahmad 
that the CIA described as “pithy.” In August 2005, KSM claimed that al-Kuwaiti was 
not a courier, and that he had never heard of Abu Ahmad transporting letters for 
UBL. In May 2007, the CIA reported that the denials of KSM and another detainee, 
combined with conflicting reporting from other detainees, added to the CIA’s belief 
that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was a significant figure. 2224 

(TS^^^^I^BBB^H^) The CIA detainee who provided the most accurate “Tier 1” 
information linking Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti to UBL, Hassan Ghul, provided the information 
prior to being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2225 Hassan Ghul was 
captured on January B* 2004, byforeign authorities in the Iraqi Kurdistan Region. 2226 Ghul was 
reportedly first interrogated by IBB then transferred to U.S. military custody and 
questioned, and then rendered to CIA custody at DETENTION SITE COBALT on January B 
2004. 2227 From January B> 2004, to January B* 2004, Hassan Ghul was questioned by the CIA 
at DETENTION SITE COBALT. During this period the CIA disseminated 21 intelligence 
reports based on Ghul’s reporting. 2228 A CIA officer told the CIA Office of Inspector General 



2224 See intelligence chronolo: 
| JAN 04); 







(102238 Z MAR 03); HEADQUARTERS 
5594 (201 039Z MAY 07). 



in Volume II, including ALEC | 

29986 (171741Z AUG 05); | 

2225 As the dissemination of 21 intelligence reports suggests, information in CIA records indicates Hassan Ghul was 
cooperative with CIA personnel prior to being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. In an 
interview with the CIA Office of Inspector General, a CIA officer familiar with Ghul stated, “He sang like a tweetie 
bird. He opened up right away and was cooperative from the outset.” (See December 2, 2004, interview with 



[REDACTED], Chief, DO, CTC UBL Department, 



.) The CIA’s September 2012 



“Lessons from the Hunt for Bin Ladin,” compiled by the CIA’s Center for the Study of Intelligence (DTS #2012- 
3826), states that: “Ghul’s tantalizing lead began a systematic but low profile effort to target and further identify 
Abu Ahmad.” On April 16, 2013, the Council on Foreign Relations hosted a forum in relation to the screening of 
the film, “Manhunt.” The forum included former CIA officer Nada Bakos, who states in the film that Hassan Ghul 
provided the critical information on Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti to Kurdish officials prior to entering CIA custody. 
When asked about the interrogation techniques used by the Kurds, Bakos stated: “. . .honestly, Hassan Ghul. . .when 
he was being debriefed by the Kurdish government, he literally was sitting there having tea. He was in a safe house. 
He wasn’t locked up in a cell. He wasn’t handcuffed to anything. He was — he was having a free flowing 
conversation. And there’s — you know, there’s articles in Kurdish papers about sort of their interpretation of the 
story and how forthcoming he was.” See www.cfr.org/countertenorism/film-screening-manhunt/p30560. When 
asked by the Committee to comment on this narrative, the CIA wrote on October 25, 2013: “We have not identified 
any info rmation in our holdings suggesting that Hassan Gul first provided information on Abu Ahmad while in 
[foreign] custod y.” S ee DTS #2013-3152 . 

21753 

121753 

AN 04); DIRECTOR 




21815 

HEADQUARTER S 
1HHHJAN 04) 

2228 For details on the reports, see 




54194 




AN 04), la ter released as HEADQUARTERS 

JAN 04), later released as HEADQUARTERS 
A N 04), later released as HEADQUARTERS 
IAN 04), later released a s HEAD 
|FEB 04); 



16471 
CIA 

TOP SECRET/ / 




QUARTERS 

1650 1 

/ /NOFORN 



AN 
AN 04); 



Page 395 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



that Hassan Ghul “opened up right away and was cooperative from the outset.” 2229 During the 
January 2004, to January 2004, sessions, Ghul was questioned on the location of UBL. 
According to a cable, Ghul speculated that “UBL was likely living in Peshawar area,” and that 
“it was well known that [UBL] was always with Abu Ahmed [al-Kuwaiti] ” 2230 Ghul described 
Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti as UBL’s “closest assistant” 2231 and listed him as one of three 
individuals likely to be with UBL. 2232 Ghul further speculated that: 

“UBL’s security apparatus would be minimal, and that the group likely lived in 
a House with a family somewhere in Pakistan. Ghul commented that after 
UBL’s bodyguard entourage was apprehended entering Pakistan following the 
fall of Afghanistan, UBL likely has maintained a small security signature of 
circa one or two persons. Ghul speculated that Abu Ahmed likely handled all 
of UBL’s needs, including moving messages out to Abu Faraj [al-Libi] . . . .” 2233 

The next day, January 2004, Hassan Ghul was transferred to 
the CIA’s DETENTION SITE BLACK. 2234 Upon arrival, Ghul was “shaved and barbered, 
stripped, and placed in the standing position against the wall” with “his hands above his head” 
for forty minutes. 2235 The CIA interrogators at the detention site immediately requested 
permission to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Ghul, writing that, during 
the forty minutes, Ghul did not provide any new information, did not show the fear that was 
typical of other recent captures, and “was somewhat arrogant and self important.” The CIA 
interrogators wrote that they “judged” that Ghul “has the expectation that in U.S. hands, his 
treatment will not be severe.” 2236 The request to CIA Headquarters to use the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques further stated: 




2229 See Decembe^^004^I^Offic^f Inspector General with [REDACTED], Chief, DO, CTC UBL 

Department, in which a CIA officer involved with the interrogations of Hassan Ghul, 

states: “He sang like a tweetie birdHeopened up right away and was cooperative from the outset.” 

2230 HEADQUARTERS ■■ ■■Hi AN 04) 

2231 lbTP^HBJAN 04) 

2232 1 ta q I 

2233 HEAD( 

2234 I 




1285 ^HJAN 04) 
1285 ^^^Hl AN 04) 

TOP SECRET/, 



NOFORN 



Page 396 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



“The interrogation team believes, based on [Hassan Ghul’s] reaction to the 
initial contact, that his al-Qa’ida briefings and his earlier experiences with U.S. 
military interrogators have convinced him there are limits to the physical 
contact interrogators can have with him. The interrogation team believes the 
approval and employment of enhanced measures should sufficiently shift 
[Hassan Ghul’s] paradigm of what he expects to happen. The lack of these 
increasd [sic] measures may limit the team’s capability to collect critical and 
reliable information in a timely manner.” 2237 



CIA Headquarters approved the request the same day, stating that 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques would “increase base’s capability to 
collect critical and reliable threat information in a timely manner.” 2238 During and after the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques^Ghulprovidedn^therinformatim 

substance on al-K uwaiti. 2239 Hassan Ghul was 

later released. 2240 The fact 



2237 

2238 



^^■■1285 

HEADQUARTERS 




AN 04) 

' JAN 04) 

2239 See intelligence chronology in Volume II. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[a]fter undergoing 
enhanced interrogation techniques,” Hassan Ghul provided information that became “more concrete and less 
speculative, it also corroborated information from Ammar that Khalid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM) was lying when 
he claimed Abu Ahmad left al-Qa’ida in 2002.” The assertion in the CIA’s June 2013 Response that information 
acquired from Hassan Ghul “[ajfter undergoing enhanced interrogation techniques” “corroborated information from 
Ammar that Khalid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM) was lying when he claimed Abu Ahmad left al-Qa’ida in 2002” is 
incorrect. First, the referenced information from Hassan Gh ul was a c quired pri or to the use of the CIA’s enhanced 

JAN 04), explains that based on 



interrogation techniques. A CIA cable, HEADQUARTERS 
Hassan Ghul’s comments that it was “well known” that UBL was always with al-Kuwaiti (acquired prior to the use 
of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques), CIA Headquarters asked interrogators to reengage KSM on the 
relationship between al-Kuwaiti and UBL, noting the “serious disconnect” between Hassan Gliul’s comments and 
KSM’s “pithy” description of Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. The cable notes that KSM had made “no reference to a link 
between Abu Ahmed and al-Qa’ida’s two top leaders, nor has he hinted at all that Abu Ahmed was involved in the 
facilitation of Zawahiri in/around Peshawar in February 2003,” and that KSM “has some explaining to do about Abu 
Ahmed and his support to UBL and Zawahiri.” Second, as the intelligence chronology in Volume II details, there 
was a significant body of intelligence well before Hassan Ghul’s pre-enhanced interrogation techniques reporting in 
January 2004 indicating that KSM was providing inaccurate information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti. See detailed 
information in Volume II intelligence chronology. Third, as detailed in CIA-provided documents (DTS #2011- 
2004), the CIA described Hassan Ghul’s reporting as “speculat[ivej” both during and after the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. Finally, as noted earlier, the CIA’s June 2013 Response ignores or minimizes a 
large body of intelligence reporting in CIA records — and documented in the Committee Study — that was acquired 
from sources and methods unrelated to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Nonetheless, the 
CIA’s June 2013 Response asserts: “It is impossible to know in hindsight whedier we could have obtained from 
Ammar, Gul, and others the same information that helped us find Bin Ladin without using enhanced techniques, or 
whether we eventually would have acquired other intelligence that allowed us to successfully pursue the Abu 
Ahmad lead or some other lead without the information we acquired from detainees in CIA custody” (italics added). 
As detailed in this summary, the most accurate intelligence from a detainee on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was acquired 
prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, and CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques provided inaccurate and fabricated information on al-Kuwaiti. See detailed information in 
the Volume II intelligence chronolof 




1635 




|; HEADQUARTERS B 

HEAD QUARTERS | 

^^^ 173426 1 

2241 See Committee Notification from the CIMiatec^^^^^^|HJ(DTS^2012-3802). 

m i 1 1 iii i mu in 1 1 

Page 397 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



that Hassan Ghul provided the detailed information linking Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti to UBL prior 
to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was omitted from CIA documents and 
testimony. 2242 

While CIA documents and testimony highlighted reporting that the 
CIA claimed was obtained from CIA detainees — and in some cases from CIA detainees 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — the CIA internally noted that 
reporting from CIA detainees — specifically CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques — was insufficient, fabricated, and/or unreliable. 




A September 1, 2005, CIA report on the search for UBL states: 



“Bin Ladin Couriers: Low-level couriers who wittingly or unwittingly facilitate 
communications between Bin Ladin and his gatekeepers remain largely 
invisible to us until a detainee reveals them. 2243 Even then, detainees provide 
few actionable leads, and we have to consider the possibility that they are 
creating fictitious characters to distract us or to absolve themselves of direct 
knowledge about Bin Ladin . We nonetheless continue the hunt for Abu 
Ahmed al-Kuwaiti — an alleged courier between Bin Ladin and KSM — and 
Abu ‘Abd al Khaliq Jan, who[m] Abu Faraj identified as his go-between with 
Bin Ladin since mid-2003, in order to get one step closer to Bin Ladin.” 2244 




states: 



A May 20, 2007, CIA “targeting study” for Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti 



“Khalid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM) described Abu Ahmad as a relatively 
minor figure and Abu Faraj al-Libi denied all knowledge of Abu Ahmad. 
Station assesses that KSM and Abu Faraj’ s reporting is not credible on this 
topic, and their attempts to downplay Abu Ahmad’s importance or deny 
knowledge of Abu Ahmad are likely part of an effort to withhold information 
on UBL or his close associates. These denials, combined with reporting from 
other detainees 2245 indicating that Abu Ahmad worked closely with KSM and 
Abu Faraj, add to our belief that Abu Ahmad is an HVT courier or 
facilitator.” 2246 



2242 See CIA letter to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence dated May 5, 2011, which includes a document 
entitled, “Background Detainee Information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” with an accompanying six-page chart 
entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti” (DTS #2011-2004). See also a similar, but less detailed 
CIA document entitled, “Detainee Reporting on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti’s Historic Links to Usama Bin Laden.” 

2243 Significant information was acquired on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti independent of CIA detainees. See intelligence 
chronology in Volume II. 

2244 Italics added. CIA analysis entitled, “Overcoming Challenges To Capturing Usama Bin Ladin, 1 September 
2005.” CIA records indicate that Abu Faraj al-Libi fabricated information relating to “‘Abd al Khaliq Jan.” 

2245 Italics added. As detailed, the reporting that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti “worked closely with KSM” and was “one 
of a few close associates of Usama bin Ladin,” who “traveled frequently” to “meet with Usama bin Ladin,” was 
acquired in 2002, from sources un related to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 

2246 Italics added. HHIBflP*"'" 



BHI9 5594 (201039Z MAY 07). Reporting from CIA detainees Ammar al-Baluchi and 
Khallad bin Attash — both subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — included similar inaccurate 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 398 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 




Additional CIA documents contrasted the lack of intelligence 
obtained from CIA detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques with the 
value of intelligence obtained from other sources. A November 23, 2007, CIA intelligence 
product, “Al-Qa’ida Watch,” with the title, “Probable Identification of Suspected Bin Ladin 
Facilitator Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” details how a: 

“review of 2002 debriefings of a [foreign government] detainee who claimed 
to have traveled in 2000 from Kuwait to Afghanistan with an ‘Ahmad al- 
Kuwaiti’ provided the breakthrough leading to the likely identification of 
Habib al-Rahman as Abu Ahmad. The [foreign government] subsequently 
informed [the CIA] that Habib al-Rahman currently is living in Pakistan, 
probably in the greater Peshawar area — according to our analysis of a body of 
reporting.” 2247 

This CIA intelligence product highlighted how reporting from Abu 
Faraj al-Libi, who was subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and denied 
knowing Abu Ahmad, differed from that of Hassan Ghul, who — prior to the application of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — stated that “Bin Ladin was always with Abu Ahmad,” 
and that Abu Ahmad had delivered a message to senior al-Qa’ida leaders in late 2003, “probably 
through Abu Faraj.” The document further states that KSM “has consistently maintained that 
Abu Ahmad ‘reti red’ from al-Qa’ida work in 2002.” The CIA document states that the CIA will 
be working with and the government, as well as utilizing a database 



information. Khallad bin Attash was arrested with Ammar al-Baluchi in a unilateral operation by Pakistani 
authorities resulting from criminal leads on April 29, 2003. On May 2003, bin Attash was rendered to CIA 
custody and immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from May 16, 2003, to May 18, 
2003, and then again from July 1 8, 2003, to July 29, 2003. On June 30, 2003, bin Attash stated that al-Kuwaiti was 
admired among the men. On July 27, 2003, bin Attash corroborated intelligence reporting that al-Kuwaiti played a 
facilitation role in al-Qa’ida and that al-Kuwaiti departed Karachi to get married. In January 2004, bin Attash stated 
that al-Kuwaiti was not close to UBL and not involved in al-Qa’ida operations, and that al-Kuwaiti was settling 
down with his wife in the summer of 2003. In August 2005, bin Attash stated that Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti was not a 
courier, that he had never heard of Abu Ahmad transporting letters for UBL, and that Abu Ahmad was instead 
focused on family after he married in 2002. In August 2006, bin Attash reiterated that al-Kuwaiti was not a courier, 
but rather focused on family life. Ammar al-Baluchi was arrested with Khallad bin Attash in a unilateral operation 
by Pakistani authorities resulting from criminal leads on April 29, 2003. Upon his arrest in Pakistan, Ammar al- 
Baluchi was cooperative and provided information on a number of topics to foreign government interrogators, 
including information on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti that the CIA disseminated prior to al-Baluchi being transferred to 
CIA custody on May |, 2003. After Ammar al-Baluchi was transferred to CIA custody, the CIA subjected Ammar 
al-Baluchi to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques from May 17, 2003, to May 20, 2003. On May 19, 2003, 
al-Baluchi admitted to fabricating information while being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
the previous day, and in response to questioning, stated that he believed UBL was on the Pakistan/ Afghanistan 
border and that a brother of al-Kuwaiti was to take over courier duties for UBL. In June 2003, al-Baluchi stated that 
there were rumors that al-Kuwaiti was a courier. In early 2004, al-Baluchi acknowledged that al-Kuwaiti may have 
worked for Abu Faraj al-Libi, but stated that al-Kuwaiti was never a courier and would not have direct contact with 
UBL. See intelligence chronology in Volume II and detainee reviews of Khallad bin Attash and Ammar al-Baluchi 
for additional information. 

2247 See CIA CTC “Al-Oa’ida Watch.” dated November 23, 2007. 




Page 399 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



of to follow-up on an individual traveling within Pakistan with a similar name 

and date of birth. 2248 

CIA cable records from early 2008highlight how the discovery 
and exploitation of phone numbers associated with al-Kuwaiti^HH| had ^ een critlca l 
collecting intelligence and locating the target, 2249 and state: 

. .debriefings of the senior most detainees who were involved in caring for 
bin Ladin have produced little locational information, and it is the final nugget 
that detainees hold on to in debriefings (over threat info and even Zawahiri 
LOCINT) given their loyalty to the al-Qa’ida leader. We assess that Abu 
Ahmad would likely be in the same category as Khalid Shaykh Muhammad 
and Abu Faraj al-Libi, so we advocate building as much of a targeting picture 
of where and when Habib/ Abu Ahmad travels to flesh out current leads to bin 
Ladin.” 2250 



On May 1, 2008, a CIA Headquarters cable entitled, “targeting 
efforts against suspected UBL facilitator Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti,” documents that the CIA had a 
number of collection platforms established to collect intelligence on Abu Ahmad al-Kuwaiti in 
order to locate UBL. The cable closes by stating: 



“although we want to refrain from addressing endgame strategies, HQS judges 
that detaining Habib should be a last resort, since we have had no/no success in 
eliciting actionable intelligence on bin Ladin’ s location from any 
detainees.” 2251 



While the aforementioned CIA assessments highlight the 
unreliability of reporting from senior al-Qa’ida leaders in CIA custody, specifically “that KSM 
and Abu Faraj ’s reporting” was assessed to be “not credible” — and that their denials “addfed] to 
[the CIA’s] belief that Abu Ahmad is an HVT courier or facilitator” 2252 — the CIA assessments 
also highlight that “reporting from other detainees indicating that Abu Ahmad worked closely 
with KSM and Abu Faraj” was useful. 2253 As documented, the initial detainee-related 
information linking Abu Ahmad to UBL and KSM did not come from CIA detainees, but from 
detainees who were not in CIA custody. 2254 



2248 See CIA C TC “Al-Qa’ida Watch,” dated November 23, 2007. 

2249 3808 (2H420Z JAN 08); HEADQUARTERS 
(240740Z JAN 08)J|^M5568 (08 1 633Z FEB 08) 

2250 Italics added. 9044 (240740Z JAN 08). 

2251 HEADQUARTERS^^H(011334Z MAY 08) 

2252 5594 (201039Z MAY 07) 

2253 




(232217Z JAN 08); 



9044 



5594 (201039Z MAY 07) 

2254 See information in Volume II intellige nce chronoloj 

TOP SECRET// 



for additional details. 



//NOFORN 



Page 400 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



IV. Overview of CIA Representations to the Media While the Program Was 
Classified 

A. The CIA Provides Information on the Still-Classified Detention and Interrogation 
Program to Journalists Who then Publish Classified Information; CIA Does Not File 
Crimes Reports in Connection with the Stories 



) In seeking to shape press reporting on the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program, CIA officers and the CIA’s Office of Public Affairs (OPA) provided 
unattributed background information on the program to journalists for books, articles, and 
broadcasts, including when the existence of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program was 
still classified . 2255 When the journalists to whom the CIA had provided background information 
published classified information, the CIA did not, as a matter of policy, submit crimes reports. 
For example, as described in internal emails, the CIA’s 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



interrogation of [KSM],” and that the arrest of Khallad bin Attash was the “result” of CIA 
interrogations of KSM. 2260 The Jehl article stated that a “secret program to transfer suspected 
terrorists to foreign countries for interrogation has been carried out by the Central Intelligence 
Agency. . . according to current and former government officials.” The article stated that a 
“senior United States official” had “provid[ed] a detailed description of the program,” and 
quoted the official as claiming that “[t]he intelligence obtained by those rendered, detained and 
interrogated ha[d] disrupted terrorist operations.” The senior official added, “[i]t has saved lives 
in the United States and abroad, and it has resulted in the capture of other terrorists.” 2261 

B. Senior CIA Officials Discuss Need to “Put Out Our Story” to Shape Public and 
Congressional Opinion Prior to the Full Committee Being Briefed 

asked CTC officers to compile information on the success of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Programin preparation for interviews of CIA officers by Tom Brokaw of NBC 
News. 2262 As ■■■ remarked in a Sametime communication with Deputy CTC Director 
Philip Mudd, during World War II, the Pentagon had an Office of War Informati on (OWI), 
whereas the CIA’s predecessor, the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), did not. then 

noted that “we need an OWI, at least every now and then. . ..” 2263 According to Mudd, concerns 
within the CIA about defending the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program in the press were 
misplaced: 2264 

“maybe people should know we’re trying to sell their program, if they 
complain, they should know that we’re trying to protect our capability to 
continue, we’re not just out there to brag. . . they don’t realize that we have 
few options here, we either get out and sell, or we get hammered, which has 
implications beyond the media, congress reads it, cuts our authorities, messes 



2260 The CIA cit War, Ronald Kessler, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 2003. As detailed elsewhere, Iyman Faris was 
already under investigation and Majid Khan, who was then in foreign government custody, had discussed Faris, 
prior to any mention of Faris by KSM. Likewise, the capture of Khallad bin Attash in April 2003 was unrelated to 
the reporting from KSM or any other CIA detainee. Kessler’s book also stated that Abu Zubaydah “soon began 
singing to the FBI and CIA about other planned plots,” and that “intercepts and information developed months 
earlier after the arrest of Ramzi Binalshibh... allowed the CIA to trace [KSM].” ( See Ronald Kessler, The CIA at 
War, St. Martin’s Press, New York, 2003.) As detailed elsewhere, Abu Zubaydah did not provide intelligence on al- 
Qa’ida “planned plots,” and KSM’s capture was unrelated to information provided by Ramzi bin Al-Shibh. Finally, 
Kessler’s book stated that KSM “told the CIA about a range of planned attacks - on U.S. convoys in Afghanistan, 
nightclubs in Dubai, targets in Turkey, and an Israeli embassy in the Middle East. Within a few months the 
transcripts of his interrogations were four feet high.” These statements were incongruent with CIA records. 

2261 “Rule Change Lets C.I.A. Freely Send Suspects Abroad,” by Douglas Jehl and David Johnston, The New York 
Times, March 6, 2005. 

2262 Email from: ■■■■■HtoJREDACTED], [RED ACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTEDhM^^^^B, [ REDACTEDT^Wi^W jREDACTEDI, WM, 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; ccT|^^^H’ ^^^HHHTsubjecTFOR IMMEDIATE 
COORDINATION: Summary of impact of detainee program^ate^pri^^, 2005, at 5:21 :37 PM. 

2263 Sametime communication, between John P. Mudd and April 13, 2005, from 19:23:50 to 



19:56:05. 



2264 As detailed in this summary, this exchange occurred the day before an anticipated Committee vote on a 
proposed Committee investigation of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 



T OP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 402 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 




up our budget, we need to make sure the impression of what we do is 
positive. . . we must be more aggressive out there, we either put out our story 
or we get eaten, there is no middle ground.” 2265 

Mudd counseled not to “advertise” the discussions between CIA 
personnel and the media with the CIA “workforce,” because “they’d misread it.” 2266 After 
promised to keep the media outreach “real close hold,” Mudd wrote: 

“most of them [CIA personnel] do not know that when the w post/ny times 
quotes ‘senior intel official,’ it’s us... authorized and directed by opa.” 2267 

WKM sent a draft compilation of plot disruptions to HIS! 
WCTC Legal to determine whether the release of the information would pose any “legal 
problems.” 2268 According to CIA attorneys, information on Issa al-Britani posed no problems 
because it was sourced to the 9/1 1 Commission. They also determined that information about 
lyman Faris and Sajid Badat that was sourced to press stories posed no legal problems because 
Faris had already pled guilty and Badat was not being prosecuted in the United States. 2269 On 
April 15, 2005, a CIA officer expressed concerns in an email to several CIA attorneys about the 
CIA releasing classified information to the media. There are no CIA records indicating a 
response to the CIA officer’s email. 2270 

That day, April 15, 2005, the National Security Council Principals 
Committee discussed a public campaign for the CIA’s Dctentionand Interrogation Program. 
After the meeting, ALEC Station personnel informed HIHHCTC Legal that scheduled 
interviews with NBC News of Director Porter Goss and Deputy CTC Director Philip Mudd 



2265 Sametime communication, between John P. Mudd and | 
19:56:05. 

2266 Sametime communication, between John P. Mudd and | 
19:56:05. 

2267 Sametime communication, between John P. Mudd and I 



|, April 13, 2005, from 19:23:50 to 
|, April 13, 2005, from 19:23:50 to 
|, April 1 3, 2005, from 19:23:50 to 



19:56:05. 

2268 Email from: Chief of Operations, ALEC Station^o^^HHHHR 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], ^^^^^B,^M^^^WT[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 














UNCLASSIFIED 




should not proceed so that “we don’t get a head [sic] of ourselves....” 2271 On June 24, 2005, 
however, Dateline NBC aired a program that included on-the-record quotes from Goss and 
Mudd, as well as quotes from “top American intelligence officials.” 2272 The program and 
Dateline NBC's associated online articles included classified information about the capture and 
interrogation of CIA detainees and quoted “senior U.S. intelligence analysts” stating that 
intelligence obtained from CIA interrogations “approaches or surpasses any other intelligence on 
the subject of al-Qaida and the construction of the network.” 2273 The Dateline NBC articles 
stated that “Al-Qaida leaders suddenly found themselves bundled onto a CIA Gulfstream V or 
Boeing 737 jet headed for long months of interrogation,” and indicated that Abu Zubaydah, 
KSM, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, and Abu Faraj al-Libi were “picked up and bundled off to 
interrogation centers.” The articles also stated that the capture of bin al-Shibh led to the captures 
of KSM and Khallad bin Attash. 2274 This information was inaccurate. 2275 There are no CIA 
records to indicate that there was any investigation or crimes report submitted in connection with 
the Dateline NBC program and its associated reporting. 

C. CIA Attorneys Caution that Classified Information Provided to the Media Should Not 
Be Attributed to the CIA 

After the April 15, 2005, National Security Council Principals 
Committee meeting, the CIA drafted an extensive document describing the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program for an anticipated media campaign. CIA attorneys, discussing aspects of 
the campaign involving off-the-record disclosures, cautioned against attributing the information 
to the CIA itself. One senior attorney stated that the proposed press briefing was “minimally 
acceptable, but only if not attributed to a CIA official.” The CIA attorney continued: “This 
should be attributed to an ‘official knowledgeable’ about the program (or some similar 
obfuscation), but should not be attributed to a CIA or intelligence official.” Referring to CIA 
efforts to deny Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests for previously acknowledged 

2271 Email from: to: subject: Brokaw interview: Take one; date: April 15, 2005, at 

1 :00:59 PM. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[w]ith regard to information related to covert action, 
authorization [to disclose information to the media] rests with the White House.” CIA records made available to the 
Committee, however, do not indicate White House approval for the subsequent media disclosures. In the summer of 
2013, the Committee requested the CIA provide any such records should they exist. No records were identified by 
the CIA. 

2272 See “The Long War; World View of War on Terror,” Dateline NBC , June 24, 2005^r^pri^005, Mudd stated 

that the program would likely be aired in June. See email from: John P. Mudd; to: subject: Re: 

Brokaw interview: Take one; date: April 18, 2005, at 08:31 AM. 

2273 “The frightening evolution of al-Qaida; Decentralization has led to deadly staying power,” Dateline NBC , June 
24,2005. 

2274 “Thg frightening evolution of al-Qaida; Decentralization has led to deadly staying power,” Dateline NBC, June 
24, 2005; “Al-Qaida finds safe haven in Iran,” Dateline NBC, June 24, 2005. Notwithstanding this content, the 
CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[a] review of the NBC broadcast, cited by the Study, shows that it contained 
no public disclosures of classified CIA information; indeed, the RD1 program was not discussed ” (emphasis in the 
original). In addition to the information described above included in the online articles associated with the 
broadcast, the broadcast itself described the role of a CIA asset in the capture of KSM and the capture of Abu Faraj 
al-Libi in “joint US/Pakistani actions” (“The Long War; World View of War on Terror,” Dateline NBC, June 24, 
2005). 



2275 As described elsewhere in this summary and in more detail in the full Committee Study, the captures of KSM 
and Khallad bin Attash were unrelated to the capture and interrogation of Ramzi bin al-Shibh. 




Page 404 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T# 



AqV Q F O R N 



information, the attorney noted that, “[o]ur Glomar figleaf is getting pretty thin.” 2276 Another 
CIA attorney noted that the draft “makes the [legal] declaration 1 just wrote about the secrecy of 
the interrogation program a work of fiction. . ..” 2277 IHUCTC Legal urged that CIA 
leadership needed to “confront the inconsistency” between CIA court declarations “about how 
critical it is to keep this information secret” and the CIA “planning to reveal darn near the entire 
program.” 2278 

D. The CIA Engages with Journalists and Conveys an Inaccurate Account of the 
Interrogation of Abu Zubaydah 

In late 2005, the CIA decided to cooperate again with Douglas Jehl 
of the New York Times , despite his intention to publish information about the program. A CIA 
officer wrote about Jehl’s proposed article, which was largely about the CIA’s detention and 
interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, “[t]his is not necessarily an unflattering story.” 2279 Jehl, who 
provided the CIA with a detailed outline of his proposed story, informed the CIA that he would 
emphasize that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques worked, that they were approved 
through an inter-agency process, and that the CIA went to great lengths to ensure that the 
interrogation program was authorized by the White House and the Department of Justice. 2280 
CIA records indicate that the CIA decided not todissuade Jehl from describingtheCIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques because, as ^HIHUCTC Legal ^^^H|^^rioted, 
“[t]he EITs have already been out there.” 2281 The CIA’s chief of ALECStationTHBB 

who wondered whether cooperation with Jehl would be “undercutting our complaint 



2276 Email from: 



Going Public Draft Talking Points -Comments Due to 
at 5:58:47 PM. 




2277 See email from: 



I; to: 



; cc: [REDACTED ], 

; subject: Re: Interrogation Program- 
me by COB TODAY. Thanks.; date: April 20, 2005, 

I; cc: [REDACTED], ^■■■■1, 



[REDA CTED]; subject: Re: Interrogation Program— Going Public Draft Ta lking Points— Comments Due to 

~ | was referring to the assault 



|^^^|me by COB TODAY. Thanks.; date: April 21 , 2005, at 07:24 AM. 
case against David Passaro. The Committee Study does not include an analysis of the accuracy of declarations to 
U.S. courts by senior CIA officials. 



2278 Email from: 

■■■I, [REDACTED], | 

Draft Talking Points-Comments Due to | 
AM. 



; cc: 



L [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Interrogation Program— Going Public 
Hiiie by COB TODAY. Thanks.; date: April 25, 2005, at 1 1:41:07 



2279 Email from: 



I; to: 



m, John A. Rizzo, 

[REDACTED], Robert L. Grenier; subject: Doug Jehl - Comprehensive Story on the Capture of Abu Zubaydah and 
Conception of EITs; date: December 15, 2005, at 02:04 PM. ____________ 



2280 Email from: 



; to: 



J°hn a. Rizzo, 

[REDACTED], Robert L. Grenier; subject: Doug Jehl - Comprehensive Story on the Capture of Abu Zubaydah and 
Conception of EITs; date: December 15, 2005, at 02:04 PM. 

2281 Email fronuJH^^^H; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]^ 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED ], \ 

Comprehensive Story on the Capture of Abu Zubaydah and Conception of EITs; date: December 15, 2005, at 02:10 
PM. Another CIA officer added “I don’t like so much talk about EITs, but that particular horse has long left the 




; subject: Doug Jehl - 



barn. . ..” See email from: 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



; to: 





I; cc: [REDACTED!, [REDACTE D], 

; subject: Re: 



, [REDACTED], 

Doug Jehl - Comprehensive Story on the Capture of Abu Zubaydah and Conception of EITs; date: December 15, 
2005, at 03:03 PM. 

1 1 i i i 1 1 ii 1 1 i n n i m 1 1 

Page 405 of 499 



m 
























UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 



against those leakers,” nonetheless suggested informing Jehl of other examples of CIA “detainee 
exploitation success.” 2282 

While the New York Times did not publish Jehl’s story, on 
September 7, 2006, the day after President Bush publicly acknowledged the program, David 
Johnston of the New York Times called the CIA’s OPA with a proposed news story about the 
interrogation of Abu Zubaydah. In an email with the subject line, “We Can’t Let This Go 
Unanswered,” the CIA’s director of public affairs in OPA, Mark Mansfield, described Johnston’s 
proposed narrative as “bullshit” and biased toward the FBI, adding that “we need to push 
back.” 2283 While it is unclear if Mansfield responded to Johnston’s proposed story, Mansfield 
later wrote in an email that there was “[n]o need to worry.” 2284 On September 10, 2006, the New 
York Times published an article by Johnston, entitled, “At a Secret Interrogation, Dispute Flared 
Over Tactics,” that described “sharply contrasting accounts” of the interrogation of Abu 
Zubaydah. The article cited officials “more closely allied with law enforcement,” who stated 
that Abu Zubaydah “cooperated with F.B.L interviewers,” as well as officials “closely tied to 
intelligence agencies,” who stated that Abu Zubaydah “was lying, and things were going 
nowhere,” and that “[i]t was clear that he had information about an imminent attack and time 
was of the essence.” The article included the frequent CIA representation that, after the use of 
“tougher tactics,” Abu Zubaydah “soon began to provide information on key A1 Qaeda operators 
to help us find and capture those responsible for the 9/1 1 attacks.” 2285 This characterization of 
Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogation is incongruent with CIA interrog ation records. 2286 CTC stated 
that the article resulted in questions to the CIA from the country HMHIRiHHEHHHIli 

and assessed that “[di sclosur es of this nature could adversely [have 
an] impact on future joint CT operations with... partners.” 2287 There are no indications 

that the CIA filed a crimes report in connection with the article. 2288 

earl y 2007, the CIA cooperated with Ronald Kessler again on 
another book. According to CIA records, the purpose of the cooperation was to “push back” on 
Kessler’s proposed accounts of intelligence related to the attacks of September 11, 2001, and the 



2282 E ma jl f rom: 



|; to: [REDACTED]; cc: 

|; subject: Re: Doug Jehl - Comprehensive Story on the 
Capture of Abu Zubaydah and Conception of EITs; date: December 15, 2005, at 8:50:36 PM. 




2283 Email from: Mark Mansfield; to: 



cc: 



, Paul J. 



; subject: We Can’t Let This Go Unanswered; date: September 7, 2006, at 01 : 12 




Gimigliano, 

PM. 

2284 Email from: Mark Mansfield; to: 



[REDACTED], 

|; subject: Re: Immediate re Abu Zubaydah 
- Re: Fw: We Can’t Let This Go Unanswered; date: September 7, 2006, at 3:14:53 PM. 

2285 “At a Secret Interrogation, Dispute Flared Over Tactics,” New York Times, David Johnston, September 10, 2006. 

2286 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III and sections on CIA claims related to the “Capture of Ramzi 
bin al-Shibh” in this summary and Volume II. 

2287 CY 2005 & CY 2006 CTC Media Leaks; September 21, 2006. The document described “the more serious CTC 
media leaks that occurred in CY 2005 and 2006.” 

2288 Senior Deputy General Counsel John Rizzo urged that his colleagues determine whether OPA c oopera ted with 
thearticle“[b]efore we get DOJ or FBI too cranked up on this.” See email from: John A. Rizzo; to: 

■■I; cc: [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], | 

|; subject: Re: Fw: Request for Crimes Reports on NYT and Time 
Magazine Leaks on Interrogation Activitie^REDACTED]^ate^eptembeM2, 2006, at 5:52:10 PM. 

TOP 

Page 406 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, 2289 which a CIA officer noted “give undue credit to the FBI for 
CIA accomplishments^ 2290 After a nother CIA office r drafted information for passage to 
Kessler, 2291 |^^^^^|CTC Legal, ^m^l^^Kwrote, “|p]f course being the lawyer, I 
would recommend not telling Im "■■■I n .iiivllimi 1 ' then wrote that if, “for policy 

reasons,” the CIA decided to cooperate with the author, there was certain information that should 
not be disclosed. then suggested that “if we are going to do this,” the CIA could 

provide information to Kessler that would “undercut the FBI agents,” who m stated had 
“leaked that they would have gotten everything anyway” from Abu Zubaydah. 2292 

After Kessler provided a draft of his book to the CIA and met with 
CIA officers, the CIA’s director of public affairs, Mark Mansfield, described what he viewed as 
the problems in Kessler’s narrative. According to Mansfield, Kessler was “vastly overstating the 
FBI’s role in thwarting terrorism and, frankly, giving other USG agencies — including CIA — 
short shrift.” Moreover, “[t]he draft also didn’t reflect the enormously valuable intelligence the 
USG gleaned from CIA’s interrogation program” and “had unnamed FBI officers questioning 
our methods and claiming their own way of eliciting information is much more effective.” 
According to Mansfield, the CIA “made some headway” in its meeting with Kessler and that, as 
a result of the CIA’s intervention, his book would be “more balanced than it would have 
been.” 2293 



Later, in an email to Mansfield, Kessler provided the “substantive 
changes” he had made to his draft following his meeting with CIA officials. The changes 
included the statement that Abu Zubaydah was subjected to “coercive interrogation techniques” 
after he “stopped cooperating.” Kessler’s revised text further stated that “the CIA could point to 
a string of successes and dozens of plots that were rolled up because of coercive interrogation 
techniques.” The statements in the revised text on the “successes” attributable to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques were similar to CIA representations to policymakers and were 
incongruent with CIA records. 2294 



2289 Sametime communication between 

2290 Email from: 



Ron Kessler draft; date: March 13, 2007, at 05:59 PM. 



I, 28/Feb/07 09:51:10 to 19:00:42. 

|; subject: Fact Check on 



2291 Email from: 



at 6:03:45 PM. 
2292 Email from 




cc: 



; subject: Re: Fact Check on Ron Kessler draft; date: March 14, 2007, 




; subject: Re: Fact Check on Ron Kessler draft; date: March 15, 



2007, at 7:07:52 AM . 

2293 Email from: Mark Mansfield; to: Michael V. Hayden, 



Morell, 



|, Jose Rodriguez, 




I, Step hen R. Ka 
bcc: 



es, Michael J. 



subject: Session with Author Ron Kessler; date: March 15, 2007, at 6:54:33 PM. 

2294 Kessler’s changes repeated the representation made in the president’s September 6, 2006, speech, which was 
based on CIA information and vetted by the CIA, that Abu Zubaydah and Ramzi bin al-Shibh “provided information 
that would help in the planning and execution of the operation that captured Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.” With 
regard to the Second Wave plotting, Kessler stated that “[i]f it had not been for coercive interrogation techniques 
used on Abu Zubaydah, CIA officials suggest, the second wave of attacks might have occurred and KSM could be 
free and planning more attacks.” As detailed in this summary, and in greater detail in Volumes II and III, the 
thwarting of the Second Wave plotting and the capture of KSM were unrelated to reporting from Abu Zubaydah. 
Kessler’s changes also included statement s about the training and expertise of C IA interrogators, the Department of 

TOP 

Page 407 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O FORN 



Kessler’s “substantive changes” made after his meeting with CIA 
officials included the statement that many members of Congress and members of the media 
“have made careers for themselves by belittling and undercutting the efforts of the heroic men 
and women who are trying to protect us.” Kessler’s revised text contended that, “[w]ithout 
winning the war being waged by the media against our own government, we are going to lose the 
war on terror because the tools that are needed will be taken away by a Congress swayed by a 
misinformed public and by other countries unwilling to cooperate with the CIA or FBI because 
they fear mindless exposure by the press.” Finally, Kessler’s changes, made after his meeting 
with CIA officers, included the statement that “[t]oo many Americans are intent on demonizing 
those who are trying to protect us.” 2295 



Justice review of the CIA’s interrogation techniques, and congressional oversight of the CIA’s Detention and 
Intenogation Program. For example, Kessler wrote, “[bjefore confronting a terrorist, each interrogator was given 
250 hours of specialized training.” This statement is incongruent with the history of the CIA program. Email from: 
Ronald Kessler; to: Mark Mansfield; subject: follow-up; date: March 16, 2007, at 10:52:05. 

2295 Email from: Ronald Kessler; to: Mark Mansfield; subject: follow-up; date: M arch 16, 2007, at 10:52:05. 

m h 1 h ii 1 1 i n n m 1 1 

Page 408 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET -// 



//NOFOR N 



V. Review of CIA Representations to the Department of Justice 

A. August 1, 2002, OLC Memorandum Relies on Inaccurate Information Regarding Abu 
Zubaydah 



The Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) in the Department of Justice 
wrote several legal memoranda and letters on the legality of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program between 2002 and 2007. The OLC requested, and relied on, information 
provided by the CIA to conduct the legal analysis included in these memoranda and letters. 

Much of the information the CIA provided to the OLC was inaccurate in material respects. 

On August 1 , 2002, the OLC issued a memorandum advising that 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah would not violate 
prohibitions against torture found in Section 2340A of Title 18 of the United States Code. 2296 
The techniques were: (1) attention grasp, (2) walling, (3) facial hold, (4) facial slap (insult slap), 
(5) cramped confinement, (6) wall standing, (7) stress positions, (8) sleep deprivation, (9) insects 
placed in a confinement box, and (10) the waterboard. The memorandum relied on CIA 
representations about Abu Zubaydah’ s status in al-Qa’ida, his role in al-Qa’ida plots, his 
expertise in interrogation resistance training, and his withholding of information on pending 
terrorist attacks. 2297 The OLC memorandum included the following statement about OLC’s 
reliance on information provided by the CIA: 

“Our advice is based upon the following facts, which you have provided to us. 

We also understand that you do not have any facts in your possession contrary 
to the facts outlined here, and this opinion is limited to these facts. If these 
facts were to change, this advice would not necessarily apply.” 2298 



2296 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August l, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1 ). Also on August 1 , 2002, OLC issued an unclassified, but non-public, opinion, from Deputy Assistant 
Attorney General John Yoo to White House Counsel Alberto Gonzales analyzing whether certain interrogation 
methods violate 18 U.S.C. §§ 2340-2340A. 

2297 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 



Tab 1). 

2298 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). During a 2008 hearing of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, then- Acting Assistant Attorney 
General Steven Bradbury stressed that the OLC’s opinions relied on factual representations made by the CIA. As 
Bradbury testified, “all of our advice addressing the CIA’s specific interrogation methods has made clear that OLC’s 
legal conclusions were contingent on a number of express conditions, limitations and safeguards adopted by the CIA 
and designed to ensure that the program would be administered by trained professionals with strict oversight and 
controls, and that none of the interrogation practices would go beyond the bounds of the law.” When asked whether 
information could be elicited from detainees using techniques authorized by the Army Field Manual, Bradbury 
responded, “I will have to defer, because on those kinds of questions in terms of the effectiveness and the 
information obtained I have to rely on the professional judgment of the folks involved at the agency, and General 
[Michael] Hayden I think has spoken to this issue before this Committee.” ( See transcript of hearing of the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence, June 10, 2008 (DTS #2008-2698).) General Hayden’s representations to the 
Committee are described elsewhere in this summar^n^r^reate^etaiHi^/olume II. 

mi 'im iii i I||( > i | i'i 

Page 409 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



flNOFORN 



The facts provided by the CIA, and relied on by the OLC to 
support its legal analysis, were cited in the August 1, 2002, memorandum, and many were 
repeated in subsequent OLC memoranda on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Much 
of the information provided by the CIA to the OLC was unsupported by CIA records. Examples 
include: 



• Abu Zubaydah’s Status in Al-Qa’ida: The OLC memorandum repeated the CIA’s 
representation that Abu Zubaydah was the “third or fourth man” in al-Qa’ida. 2299 This 
CIA assessment was based on single-source reporting that was recanted prior to the 
August 1, 2002, OLC legannemorandum. This retraction was provided to several senior 
CIA officers, including m^H|CTC Legal, to whom the information was emailed on 
July 10, 2002, three weeks prior to the issuance of the August 1, 2002, OLC 
memorandum. 2300 The CIA later concluded that Abu Zubaydah was not a member of al- 
Qa’ida. 2301 

• Abu Zubaydah ’s Role in Al-Qa ’ ida Plots: The OLC memorandum repeated the CIA’s 
representation that Abu Zubaydah “has been involved in every major terrorist operation 
carried out by al Qaeda,” 2302 and that Abu Zubaydah “was one of the planners of the 
September 1 1 attacks.” 2303 CIA records do not support these claims. 

• Abu Zubaydah’ s Expertise in Interrogation Resistance Training: The OLC memorandum 
repeated the CIA’s representation that Abu Zubaydah was “well-versed” in resistance to 
interrogation techniques, and that “it is believed Zubaydah wrote al Qaeda’s manual on 
resistance techniques.” 2304 A review of CIA records found no information to support 
these claims. To the contrary, Abu Zubaydah later stated that it was his belief that all 



2299 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 



23°° E nia ii from: 



with multiple cc’s; subject: AZ information; date: July 



10, 2002, at 1:18:52 PM. This claim was included in subsequent OLC memoranda. See Memorandum for John A. 
Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations 
Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of 
High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 11). 

2301 CIA Intelligence Assessment, August 16, 2006, “Countering Misconceptions About Training Camps in 
Afghanistan, 1990-2001.” 

2302 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). This claim was included in subsequent OLC memoranda. See Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior 
Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations Under 
Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of High 
Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 1 1). 

2303 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 

2304 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 

mi n in i 

Page 410 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



individuals provide information in detention, and that captured individuals should 
“expect that the organization will make adjustments to protect people and plans when 
someone with knowledge is captured.” 2305 

• Abu Zubaydah' s Withholding of Information on Pending Terrorist Attacks: The OLC 
memorandum repeated CIA representations stating that “the interrogation team is certain” 
Abu Zubaydah was withholding information related to planned attacks against the United 
States, either within the U.S. homeland or abroad. 2306 CIA records do not support this 
claim. Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation team was not “certain” that Abu Zubaydah was 
withholding “critical threat information.” To the contrary, the interrogation team wrote 
to CIA Headquarters: “[o]ur assumption is the objective of this operation [the 
interrogation of Abu Zubaydah] is to achieve a high degree of confidence that [Abu 
Zubaydah] is not holding back actionable information concerning threats to the United 
States beyond that which [Abu Zubaydah] has already provided.” 2307 

B. The CIA Interprets the August 1, 2002, Memorandum to Apply to Other Detainees, 
Despite Language of the Memorandum; Interrogations of Abu Zubaydah and Other 
Detainees Diverge from the CIA’s Representations to the OLC 

The CIA broadly interpreted the August 1, 2002, OLC 
memorandum to allow for greater operational latitude. For example, the memorandum stated 
that the legal advice was specific to the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah and the specific CIA 
representations about Abu Zubaydah; however, the CIA applied its enhanced interrogation 
techniques to numerous other CIA detainees without seeking additional formal legal advice from 
the OLC. As detailed elsewhere, the other detainees subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques varied significantly in terms of their assessed role in terrorist activities 
and the information they were believed to possess. CIA records indicate that it was not until July 
29, 2003, almost a year later, that the attorney general stated that the legal principles of the 
August 1, 2002, memorandum could be applied to other CIA detainees. 2308 

The August 1, 2002, OLC memorandum also included an analysis 
of each of the CIA’s proposed enhanced interrogation techniques with a description of how the 



2305 10496 (162014Z FEB 03) 

23°6 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 

2307 [REDACTE D] 73208 (231043Z JUL 02); email from: to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

subject: Addendum from [DETENTION SITE GREEN], [REDACTED] 73208 (231043Z JUL 02); 
July 23, 2004, at 07:56:49 PM. See also email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: [SWIGERT 
and DUNBAR]; date: August 8, 21, 2002, at 10:21 PM. 

2308 Letter from Assistant Attorney General Jack L. Goldsmith III to Directo^eneUlun^^, 2004 (DTS #2004- 

2710). In an August 2003 interview with the OIG, Uf^HCTC Legal, stated that “every 

detainee interro gated is diffe rent in that they are outside the opinion because the opinion was written for Zubaydah.” 
The context f or lUUM* s statement was the legality of the waterboarding of KSM. See interview of Hid 
lUdHH, by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 20, 



2003. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFOR N 



Page 41 1 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T // 



// NOFORN 



CIA stated the techniques would be applied. 2309 However, in the interrogations of Abu 
Zubaydah and subsequent CIA detainees, the CIA applied the techniques in a manner that a 
Department of Justice attorney concluded “was quite different from the [description] presented in 
2002.” 2310 As reported by the CIA’s inspector general, the CIA used the waterboarding 
technique against Abu Zubaydah, and later against KSM, in a manner inconsistent with CIA 
representations to the OLC, as well as the OLC’s description of the technique in the August 1, 
2002, memorandum. In addition, the CIA assured the OLC that it would be “unlikely” that CIA 
detainees subjected to sleep deprivation would experience hallucinations, and that if they did, 
medical personnel would intervene. 2311 However, multiple CIA detainees subjected to prolonged 
sleep deprivation experienced hallucinations, and CIA interrogation teams did not always 
discontinue sleep deprivation after the detainees had experienced hallucinations. 2312 The CIA 
further represented to the OLC that Abu Zubaydah’s recovery from his wound would not be 
impeded by the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2313 However, prior to the 
OLC memorandum, DETENTION SITE GREEN personnel stated, and CIA Headquarters had 
confirmed, that the interrogation process would take precedence over preventing Abu 
Zubaydah’s wound from becoming infected. 2314 Other CIA detainees were also subjected to the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, notwithstanding concerns that the interrogation 
techniques could exacerbate their injuries. 2315 The CIA also repeatedly used interrogation 
techniques beyond those provided to the OLC for review, including water dousing, nudity, 
abdominal slaps, and dietary manipulation. 2316 



At the July 29, 2003, meeting of select National Security Council 
principals, Attorney General John Ashcroft expressed the view that “while appropriate caution 
should be exercised in the number of times the waterboard was administered, the repetitions 



2309 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 

2310 Department of Justice Office of Professional Responsibility; Report, Investigation into the Office of Legal 
Counsel’s Memoranda Concerning Issues Relating to the Central Intelligence Agency’s Use of ‘Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques’ on Suspected Terrorists, July 29, 2009, pp. 140-41 (DTS #2010-1058). 

2311 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 




11299 

1530 



1308 



| JAN 04); | 

2313 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab!' 



2314 



10536 (15 1006Z JUL 02); ALEC 
interrogation techniques on Abu Zubaydah, 




(I82321Z JUL 02). After the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
reported that “[d]uring the most aggressive portions of [Abu 
Zubaydah’s] interrogation, the combination of a lack of hygiene, sub-optimal nutrition, inadvertent trauma to the 
wound secondary to some of the stress positions utilized at that stage and the removal of formal, obvio us medical 
care to further isolate the subject had an overall additive effect on the deterioration of the wound.” See HHH 
10679 (250932Z AUG 02). 

2315 See Volume III, including detainee reviews of Abu Hazim and Abd al-Karim. 

2316 As described later, the CIA sought OLC approval for these techniques on July 30, 2004, almost two years after 



TC Legal 



the August 1, 2002, memorandum. See letter from 
Attorney General Levin, July 30, 2004 (D TS #2009-1809). 

TOP SECRET/ 

Page 412 of 499 



to Acting Assistant 



# N O FORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET // 



//NOF O RN 



described do not contravene the principles underlying DOJ’s August 2002 opinion.” 2317 Records 
do not indicate that the attorney general opined on the manner (as opposed to the frequency) with 
which the waterboard was implemented, or on interrogation techniques not included in the 
August 2002 opinion. The differences between the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, as 
described by the CIA to the OLC in 2002, and the actual use of the techniques as described in the 
CIA Inspector General May 2004 Special Review, prompted concerns at the Department of 
Justice. On May 27, 2004, Assistant Attorney General Jack Goldsmith sent a letter to the CIA 
general counsel stating that the Special Review “raises the possibility that, at least in some 
instances and particularly early in the program, the actual practice may not have been congruent 
with all of these assumptions and limitations.” In particular, Goldsmith’s letter highlighted the 
statement in the Special Review that the use of the waterboard in SERE training was “so 
different from subsequent Agency usage as to make it almost irrelevant.” 2318 

C. Following Suspension of the Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, the 
CIA Obtains Approval from the OLC for the Interrogation of Three Individual Detainees 

The May 2004 CIA Inspector General Special Review 
recommended that the CIA’s general counsel submit in writing a request for the Department of 
Justice to provide the CIA with a “formal, written legal opinion, revalidating and modifying, as 
appropriate, the guidance provided” in the August 1, 2002, memorandum. It also recommended 
that, in the absence of such a written opinion, the DCI should direct that the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques “be implemented only within the parameters that were mutually 
understood by the Agency and DoJ on 1 August 2002.” 2319 After receiving the Special Review, 
Assistant Attorney General Jack Goldsmith informed the CIA that the OLC had never formally 
opined on whether the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques would meet constitutional 
standards. 2320 On May 24, 2004, DCI Tenet, Deputy Director John McLaughlin, General 
Counsel Scott Muller, and others met to discuss the Department of Justice’s comments, after 
which DCI Tenet directed that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, as well as 
the use of the CIA’s “standard” techniques, be suspended. 2321 On June 4, 2004, DCI Tenet 



2317 Letter from Assistant Attorney General Jack L. Goldsmith, 111 to Director George Tenet, June 18, 2004 (DTS 
#2004-2710). As described above, the CIA’s presentation to the NSC principals undercounted the frequency with 
which KSM and Abu Zubaydah were subjected to the waterboard. 

2318 Letter from Assistant Attorney General Goldsmith to CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, May 27, 2004. 

2319 CIA Office of Inspector General, Special Review - Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program, 
(2003-7123-IG), May 2004. 

2320 May 25, 2004, Talking Points for DCI Telephone Conversation with Attorney General: DOJ’s Legal Opinion 

Re: CIA’s Counterterrorist Program (CT) Interrogation. This position was confirmed in a June 10, 2004, letter 
(Letter from Assistant Attorney General Jack L. Goldsmith 111, to Scott Muller, General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, June 10, 2004). 



2321 



May 24, 2004, Memorandum for the Record from 



| Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorism 



Center, Subject: Memorandum of Meeting with the DCI Regarding DOJ’s Statement that DOJ has Rendered No 
Legal Opinion on Whether the CIA’s Use of Enhanced Interrogation Techniques would meet Constitutional 



Standards; email from: 



|, C/RDG; to: [REDACTED]; cc: Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], 



■H. [REDACTED], [REDACTED], | 
Enhanced Interrogations; date: May 25, 20 04. 

TOP SECRET// 



|; subject: Interim Guidance for Standard and 



//NOFORN 



Page 413 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



issued a formal memorandum suspending the use of the techniques, pending policy and legal 

2322 

review. 



As described in this summary, on July 2, 2004, Attorney General 
Ashcroft and Deputy Attorney General James Comey attended a meeting of select National 
Security Council principals, the topic of which was the proposed CIA interrogation of Janat 
Gul. 2323 According to CIA records, the attorney general stated that the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against Gul would be consistent with U.S. law and treaty 
obligations, although Ashcroft made an exception for the waterboard, which he stated required 
further review, “primarily because of the view that the technique had been employed in a 
different fashion than that which DOJ initially approved.” 2324 On July 20, 2004, Ashcroft, along 
with Patrick Philbin and Daniel Levin from the Department of Justice, attended a National 
Security Council Principals Committee meeting at which Ashcroft stated that the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques described in the August 1, 2002, OLC memorandum, 
with the exception of the waterboard, would not violate U.S. statutes, the U.S. Constitution, or 
U.S. treaty obligations. The attorney general was then “directed” to prepare a written opinion 
addressing the constitutional issues, and the CIA was directed to provide further information to 
the Department of Justice with regard to the waterboard. 2325 On July 22, 2004, Attorney General 
Ashcroft sent a letter to Acting DCI John McLaughlin stating that nine interrogation techniques 
(those addressed in the August 1, 2002, memorandum, with the exception of the waterboard) did 
not violate the U.S. Constitution or any statute or U.S. treaty obligations, in the context of the 
CIA interrogation of Janat Gul. 2326 



(TS//^^^^^^|^^^/NF) On July 30, 2004, anticipating the interrogation of Janat Gul, the 
CIA provided the OLC for the first time a description of dietary manipulation, nudity, water 
dousing, the abdominal slap, standing sleep deprivation, and the use of diapers, all of which the 
CIA described as a “supplement” to the interrogation techniques outlined in the August 1, 2002, 
memorandum. 2327 The CIA’s descriptions of the interrogation techniques were incongruent with 
how the CIA had applied the techniques in practice. The CIA description of a minimum calorie 
intake was incongruent with the history of the program, as no minimum calorie intake existed 
prior to May 2004 and the March 2003 draft OMS guidelines allowed for food to be withheld for 



2322 June 4, 2004, Memorandum for Deputy Director for Operations from Director of Central Intelligence Re: 
Suspension of Use of Interrogation Techniques. On June 2, 2004, George Tenet informed the President that he 
intended to resign from his position on July 11, 2004. The White House announced the resignation on June 3, 2004. 

2323 Janat Gul’s interrogation is detailed in Volume III and more briefly in this summary. 

2324 Letter from Assistant Attorney General Ashcroft to General Counsel Muller, July 7, 2004 (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 3); July 2, 2004, CIA Memorandum re Meeting with National Security Advisor Rice in the White House 
Situation Room, Friday 2 July Re: Interrogations and Detainee Janat Gul; July 6, 2004, Memorandum from 
Condoleezza Rice, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, to George Tenet, Director of Central 
Intelligence, Re: Janat Gul. 

2325 July 29, 2004, Memorandum for the Record from CIA General Counsel Scott Muller Re: Principals Meeting 
relating to Janat Gul on 20 July 2004. 

2326 The one-paragraph letter did not provide legal analysis or substantive discussion of the interrogation techniques. 
( See letter from Attorney General John Ashcroft to Acting DCI John McLaughlin, July 22, 2004 (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 4).) 

2327 Letter from IHIHK'TC Legal to Acting Assistant Attorney General Daniel Levin, July 30, 



2004 (DTS #2009-1809). 

TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 414 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 




one to two days. 2328 The CIA represented to the OLC that nude detainees were “not wantonly 
exposed to other detainees or detention facility staff,” even though nude detainees at the CIA’s 
DETENTION SITE COBALT were “kept in a central area outside the interrogation room” and 
were “walked around” by guards as a form of humiliation. 2329 The CIA’s description of water 
dousing made no mention of cold water immersion, which was used on CIA detainees and taught 
in CIA interrogator training. 2330 The CIA representation describing a two-hour limit for the 
shackling of detainees’ hands above their heads is incongruent with records of CIA detainees 
whose hands were shackled above their heads for extended periods, as well as the draft March 
2003 OMS guidelines permitting such shackling for up to four hours. 2331 The CIA further 
represented to the OLC that the use of diapers was “for sanitation and hygiene purposes,” 
whereas CIA records indicate that in some cases, a central “purpose” of diapers was “[t]o cause 
humiliation” and “to induce a sense of helplessness.” 2332 

On August 13, 2004, CIA attorneys, medical officers, and other 
personnel met with Department of Justice attorneys to discuss some of the techniques for which 
the CIA was seeking approval, in particular sleep deprivation, water dousing, and the 
waterboard. When asked about the possibility that detainees subjected to standing sleep 
deprivation could suffer from edema, OMS doctors informed the Department of Justice attorneys 
that it was not a problem as the CIA would “adjust shackles or [the] method of applying the 
technique as necessary to prevent edema, as well as any chafing or over-tightness from the 
shackles.” With regard to water dousing, CIA officers represented that “water is at normal 
temperature; CIA makes no effort to ‘cool’ the water before applying it.” With respect to the 
waterboard, CIA officers indicated that “each application could not last more than 40 seconds 



2328 OMS GUIDELINES ON MEDICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPORT TO DETAINEE RENDITION, 
INTERROGATION, AND DETENTION, May 17, 2004, OMS Guidelines on Medical and Psychological Support 
to Detainee Interrogations, First Draft, March 7, 2003. The evolution of OMS Guidelines is described in Volume III 
of the Committee Study. 

2329 Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, 

April 14, 2003. 

2330 Email from: [REDACTED] to: ||^^||||^^^|; subject: Memo; date: March 15, 2004. 

See detainee reviews of Abu Hudhaifa and Muhammad Umar ‘ Abd al-Rahman aka Asadallah. 



2331 Q MS Guidelines on Medical a nd PsychologicalSupport to Detainee Interrogations, “First Draft,” March 7, 

2003; 28246 HriHHHjH; Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of 

Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes7^^^^^^^B^priL5^003; Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, 

Review of Interrogations for CounterterrorismPurposes^^B^^^^^^B^pri^O, 2003; Memorandum for 
[REDACTED] from [REDACTED] November |, 2002, Subject: 

Legal Analysis of [REDACTED ] Personnel Participating in Interrogation at the CIA Detention Facility in 

“[DETENTION SITE COBALT]”). For example, Ridha al-Najjar was reported to 
have undergone “hanging,” described as “handcuffing one or both of his wrists to an overhead horizontal bar” for 22 
hours each day for two consecutive days. See Memorandum for [REDACTED], November |, 2002, Subiect^egal 
Analysis of [REDACTED] Personnel Participating in Interrogation at the CIA Detention Facility in 

(aka “[DETENTION SITE COBALT]”. See also 10171 (101527Z JAN 03), indicating that 

with hands tied overhead, overnight.” 

\ OFFICER 1], December 19, 2002; CIA Interrogation 
Program Draft Course Materials, March 11, 2003, pg. 28; CTC/RDG Interrogation Program, December 15, 2003, 
pg. 10^)IRECTORHBB (251609Z JUL 02). See also “Standard InteuogatiorLTeclmiques,” attachment to email 
from: ^HHIlfl^o^cott W. Muller, John Rizzo, [REDACTED], subject: revised 



Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri “remained in thestandim 
interview ofKbft^fe^ 



interrogation discussion; date: July 19, 2004. 




Page 415 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SE G RET// 



//NOF O RN 



(and usually only lasted about 20 seconds).” 2333 As detailed in the full Committee Study, each of 
these representations was incongruent with the operational history of the CIA program. 



(TS4 



c ) On August 25, 2004, the CIA’s Associate General Counsel 
sent a letter to the OLC stating that Janat Gul, who had been rendered to CIA custody 
on July 2004, had been subjected to the attention grasp, walling, facial hold, facial slap, wall 
standing, stress positions, and sleep deprivation. The letter further stated that CIA interrogators 
“assess Gul not to be cooperating, and to be using a sophisticated counterinterrogation strategy ,” 
and that the further use of the same enhanced interrogation techniques would be “unlikely to 
move Gul to cooperate absent concurrent use” of dietary manipulation, nudity, water dousing, 
and the abdominal slap. The letter referenced the reporting from a CIA source, 2334 stating: “CIA 
understands that before his capture, Gul had been working to facilitate a direct meeting between 



the HHHB 

himself.” 2335 



CIA 



source reporting on the pre-election threat and Abu Faraj [al-Libi] 



The following day, August 26, 2004, Acting Assistant Attorney 
General Daniel Levin informed CIA Acting General Counsel John Rizzo that the use of the four 
additional interrogation techniques did not violate any U.S. statutes, the U.S. Constitution, or 
U.S. treaty obligations. Levin’s advice relied on the CIA’s representations about Gul, including 
that “there are no medical and psychological contraindications to the use of these techniques as 
you plan to employ them on Gul.” 2336 At the time, CIA records indicated: (1) that standing sleep 
deprivation had already caused significant swelling in Gul’s legs; (2) that standing sleep 
deprivation continued despite Gul’s visual and auditory hallucinations and that Gul was “not 
oriented to time or place”; 2337 (3) that CIA interrogators on-site did not believe that “escalation to 
enhanced pressures will increase [Gul’s] ability to produce timely accurate locational and threat 



2333 August 11, 2004, Letter from [REDACTED], Assistant General Counsel, to Dan Levin, Acting Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel; August 27, 2004, Memorandum for the Record from [REDACTED] Re: 
Meeting with Department of Justice Attorneys on 13 August, 2004, Regarding Specific Interrogation Techniques, 
Including the Waterboard. 

2334 As described in this summary, and in more detail in the Committee Study, the source later admitted to 
fabricating info rmation related to the “pre-election” threat. 

2335 Letter from Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Dan Levin, Ac ting A ssistant Attorne y 

General, August 25, 2004 (DTS #2009-1809). For Gul’s rendition, see 1512 04). 

According to an August 16, 2004, cable, a CIA interrogator did “not believe that escalation to e nhanced mea sures 

s] ability to produce timely accurate locational and threat information.” (^|||H[H 1567 
).) On August 19, 2004, a cable from DETENTION SITE BLACK noted that th^nterroeation 
team “does not believe [Gul] is withholding imminent threat information.” See 1574 (HHHHiiil 

04). 



will increase [Gu l’: 
■04 



2336 Letter to John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, CIA; from Daniel Levin, Acting Assistant Attorney General, 
August 26, 2004 (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 6). In May 2005, the OLC again accepted the CIA’s representations that a 
psychological assessment found that Gul was “alert and oriented and his concentration and attention were 
appropriate,” that Gul’s “thought processes were clear and logical; there was no evidence of a thought disorder, 
delusions, or hallucinations,” and that there “were not significant signs of depression anxiety or other mental 
disturbance.” See memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, 
from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: 
Application of 18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340 A to Certain Techniques That May be Used in the Interrogation of a 
Hig h Value al Q aeda Detainee (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 9). 

1530 (081633Z AUG 04) ; 1541 (101228Z AUG 0 4) 

-TOP SECRET// ^^— 



2337 



Page 416 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NQF O RN 



information”; 2338 and (4) that CIA interrogators did not believe that Gul was “withholding 
imminent threat information.” 2339 

Levin’s August 26, 2004, letter to Rizzo was based on the premise 
that “[w]e understand that [Janat] Gul is a high-value al Qaeda operative who is believed to 
possess information concerning an imminent terrorist threat to the United States.” 2340 Levin’s 
understanding was based o n the CIA ’s re presentatio n that “Gul had been working to facilitate a 
direct meeting between the LI A m source reporting on the pre-election threat 

and Abu Faraj [al-Libi].” 2341 This information later proved to be inaccurate. As detailed 
elsewhere in this summary, the threat of a terrorist attack to precede the November 2004 U.S. 
election was found to be based on a CIA source whose information was questioned by senior 
C TC officia ls at the time. 2342 The same CIA source admitted to fabricating the information after 
a in October 2004. 2343 In November 2004, after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 

interrogation techniques on Janat Gul, CIA’s chief of Base at DETENTION SITE BLACK, 
where Janat Gul was interrogated, wrote that “describing [Gul] as ‘highest ranking’ gives him a 
stature which is undeserved, overblown and misleading.” The chief of Base added that “[sjtating 
that [Gul] had ‘long standing access to senior leaders in al-Qa’ida’ is simply wrong.” 2344 In 
December 2004, CIA officers concluded that Janat Gul was “not the link to senior AQ leaders 
that [CIA Headquarters] said he was/is,” 2345 and in April 2005 CIA officers wrote that “[t]here 
simply is no ‘smoking gun’ that we can refer to that would justify our continued holding of 
[Janat Gul].” 2346 




memorandum analyzing the legality of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, the OLC 
sought information from the CIA on “what [the CIA] got from Janat Gul, was it valuable, [and] 
did it help anything....” Th e CIA did not im mediately respond to this request, and the CIA’s 
Associate General Counsel noted that DOJ personnel had “taken to calling 

[him] daily” for additional information. 2347 Subsequently, on April 15, 2005, the CIA informed 



1567(1 61 730Z AUG 04) 

1574 (191 346Z AUG 04) 

2340 Letter to John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, CIA; from Daniel Levin, Acting Assistant Attorney General, 
August 26, 2004 (DTS #2009-18 1 0, Tab 6). 



2341 Letter from 



|, Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Dan Levin, Acting Assistant Attorney 



General, August 25, 2004 (DTS # 200 9-1809). 
2342 Email from 






[REDACTED], 

|; subject: could AQ be testing [ASSET Y] and [Source Name REDACTED]?; date: March 



2004, at 06 :55 AM; email 
ItlSSHTRED ACTED], ■ 



|; subject: Re: could AQ be testing [ASSET Y] and [Source Name 
REDACTED]?; date: March 2004, at 7:52:32 AM. The fabricated source reporting is described elsewhere in 
this summary. 

2343 



1411 (| 



2344 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: 




subject: re ALEC 



I; November 10, 2004. 



2345 CIA “Comments on Detainees,” December 19, 2004, Notes from a C D from [DETENTION SI TE BLACK], 

2346 Email from: [REDACTED] (COB DETENTION SITE BLACK); to: 



2347 Email from: 





I ; subje ct: re 
; to: 

[REDACTED]; subject: questions from OLCforArtl6opinion^ate^priH^ 2005; email from: 

TOP 

Page 417 of 499 




Land 



UNCLASSIFIED 















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 

the OLC that “during most of Gul’s debriefings, he has sought to minimize his knowledge of 
extremist activities and has provided largely non-incriminating information about his 
involvement in their networks.” 2348 On May 10, 2005, the OLC issued a memorandum that 
stated, “ty]ou informed us that the CIA believed Gul had information about al Qaeda’s plans to 
launch an attack with in the Un ited States... [o]ur conclusions depend on these assessments.” 
The OLC referenced August 25, 2004, letter on Gul and the pre-election threat. 2349 In 

a May 30, 2005, memorandum, the OLC referred to Janat Gul as “representative of the high 
value detainees on whom enhanced techniques have been, or might be used,” and wrote that “the 
CIA believed [that Janat Gul | had actionable intelligence concerning the pre-election threat to 
the United States.” 2330 In the same memorandum, the OLC conveyed a new CIA representation 
describing the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Janat Gul, which 
stated: 



VNQFORN 



“Gul has provided information that has helped the CIA with validating one of 
its key assets reporting on the pre-election threat.” 2351 



c ) There arc no indications in the memorandum that the CIA 
informed the OLC that it had concluded that Gul had no information about the pre-election 
threat, which was the basis on which the OLC had approved the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Gul in the first place, or that CIA officers had determined that 
Gul was “not the man we thought he was.” In September 2004, the OLC advised the CIA that 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani and 
Sharif al-Masri was also legal, based on the CIA representations that the two detainees were al- 
Qa’ida operatives involved in the “operational planning” of the pre-election plot against the 
United States. 2 ’'’ 2 This CIA assessment was based on the same fabrications from the same CIA 



to: and 

questions from OLC for Art 16 opinion; date: April 1 4, 2005. 

2348 April 15, 2005Ja>U(^OJ Command Center, for Office of Legal Counsel, U.S. Department of 

Justice, from HU Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, re: Janat Gul. 

234<) Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 
18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al 
Qaeda Detainee. 

2350 Memorandum for John A. Ri/.zo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 1 6 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 1 1). 

2331 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTSnf200(^U0, Tab 1 1), citing Janat Gul Memo 
pp. 1-2. See April 15, 2005, fa>U(^O^ommand Center, for Office of Legal Counsel, U.S. 

Department of Justice, from HH Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, re: Janat Gul. 

2352 Letter to John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, CIA; from Daniel Levin, September 6, 2004 (DTS #2009- 
1810, Tab 7); Letter to John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, CIA; from Daniel Levin, September 20, 2004 (DTS 



#2009-1810, Tab 8). 



T O P-SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 



Page 4 1 8 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



source. 2353 Like Janat Gul, Ghailani and al-Masri were subjected to extended sleep deprivation 
and experienced hallucinations. 2354 



D. May 2005 OLC Memoranda Rely on Inaccurate Representations from the CIA 

Regarding the Interrogation Process, the CLA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques, and 
the Effectiveness of the Techniques 

On May 4, 2005, ActingAssistantAttorney General Steven 
Bradbury faxed to CIA Associate General Counsel a set °f questions related to 

the CIA’s enhanced interrog ation tech niques, in which Bradbury referenced medical journal 
articles. The following day, sent a tetter to Bradbury stating that the CIA’s responses 

had been composed by the CIA’s Office of Medical Services (OMS). The CIA response stated 
that any lowering of the threshold of pain caused by sleep deprivation was “not germane” to the 
program, because studies had only identified differences in sensitivity to heat, cold, and pressure, 
and the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques “do not involve application of heat, cold, 
pressure, any sharp objects (or indeed any objects at all).” 2355 With regard to the effect of sleep 
deprivation on the experience of water dousing, the CIA response stated that “at the temperatures 
of water we have recommended for the program the likelihood of induction of pain by water 
dousing is very low under any circumstances, and not a phenomenon we have seen in detainees 
subject to this technique.” 2356 In response to Bradbury’s query as to when edema or shackling 
would become painful as a result of standing sleep deprivation, the CIA responded, “[w]e have 
not observed this phenomenon in the interrogations performed to date, and have no reason to 
believe on theoretical grounds that edema or shackling would be more painful,” provided the 
shackles are maintained with “appropriate slack” and “interrogators follow medical officers’ 
recommendation to end standing sleep deprivation and use an alternate technique when the 
medical officer judges that edema is significant in any way.” The CIA response added that the 
medical officers’ recommendations “are always followed,” and that “[djetainees have not 
complained about pain from edema.” Much of this information was inaccurate. 2357 



2353 



^■ 1411(1 

2354 [REDACT ED] 3221 

2355 Letter from 




[REDACTED] 3242 04) 

|, Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Steve Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 4, 2005. Multiple interrogatio n plans for CIA d etainees called for 
‘uncomfortably” cool temperatures along with sleep deprivation. See 10361 

1758 



2356 Letter from 



10654 (030904Z MAR 03). 

|, Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Steve Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 4, 2005. The CIA had subjected detainees to cold water baths during periods 
of sleep deprivation. As a CIA psychologist noted, “I heard [Abu Hudhaifa] gasp out loud several times as he was 
placed in the tub.” ( See email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Memo; date: March 15, 2004.) The 
inspector general later reported that, as a result of being bathed in ice water, Abu Hudhaifa was “shivering” and 
interrogators were concerned about his body temperature dropping (2005-8085-IG, at 12). See also \ 

42025 

, Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Steve Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney 
4, 2005. Numerous d etainees subjected to standing sl eep deprivation 
34098 13092 

40847 (251619Z JUN 03); | ' 



2357 Letter from 




General, Office of Legal C ounsel, Ma^ 
suffered from edema. (See 
AUG 03); 




10429 (101215Z FEB 03); 



1246 (171946Z AUG 
10909 (20191 8Z MAR 



10492 (161529Z FEB 03); 

1 42206 (19 1513Z JUL 03).) Detainees sometim es complained of pain and swelling 

TOP 

Page 419 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP -S ECRE T// 



//NOFORN 



Bradbury further inquired whether it was “possible to tell reliably 
(e.g. from outward physical signs like grimaces) whether a detainee is experiencing severe pain.” 
The CIA responded that “all pain is subjective, not objective,” 2358 adding: 

“Medical officers can monitor for evidence of condition or injury that most 
people would consider painful, and can observe the individual for outward 
displays and expressions associated with the experience of pain. Medical 
officer [sic] can and do ask the subject, after the interrogation session has 
concluded, if he is in pain, and have and do provide analgesics, such as Tylenol 
and Aleve, to detainees who report headache and other discomforts during 
their interrogations. We reiterate, that an interrogation session would be 
stopped if, in the judgment of the interrogators or medical personnel, medical 
attention was required.” 2359 

As described elsewhere, multiple CIA detainees were subjected to 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques despite their medical conditions. 2360 

Bradbury’s fax also inquired whether monitoring and safeguards 
“will effectively avoid severe physical pain or suffering for detainees,” which was a formulation 
of the statutory definition of torture under consideration. Despite concerns from OMS that its 
assessments could be used to support a legal review of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, 2361 the CIA’s response stated: 



in th eir lower e xtremities. (See, for example, 
2620 (221303Z AUGi>7 
1 2642 (271341Z AUG 07); 
not always disc ontinued with the onset of edema. 
2358 Letter from MMMMf 





2615 (201528Z AUG 07); 
2623 (231 234Z AUG 07); 



2619 (21 1349Z AUG 
2629 (251637Z AUG 07); 
2643 (271856Z AUG 07).) As noted, standing sleep deprivation was 



|, Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Steve Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney 



General, Office of Legal Counse l, May 4, 2005. 
2359 Letter from I ” 



|, Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Steve Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Le gal Counsel , May 4, 2005. 

10536 (151006Z JULY 02) ; ALEC 
10618 (121448Z AUG 0 2); 

37754 



2360 See, for example, 
(20133 1Z AUG 02); ' 



(182321Z JUL 02); 



10647 



10679 (250932Z AUG 02); DIRECTOR 



IAY 03); 

38161 (131326Z MAY 03^; DIRECTOR 

34098 
343101 




IAY 03); DIRECTOR | 



IAY 03); 



34294 



See also detainee reports and reviews in Volume III. 



2361 On A pril 11, 2005, after reviewing a draft OLC opinion, OMS personnel wrote a memorandum for 
H that stated, “[s]imply put, OMS is not in the business of saying what is acceptable in causing discomfort to 
other human beings, and will not take on that burden.... OMS did not review or vet these techniques prior to their 
introduction, but rather came into this program with the understanding of your office and DOJ that they were already 
determined as legal, permitted and safe. We see this current iteration [of the OLC memorandum] as a reversal of 
that sequence, and a relocation of those decisions to OMS. If this is the case, that OMS has now the responsibility 
for determining a procedure’s legality through its determina tion of safety, then w e will need to review all procedures 
in that light giv en this new responsibility 
[REDACTED], BMI jttMH 

8 April Draft Opinion from DOJ - OMS Concems^ate^pri^^^005^H0U2 AM. 

m i I I III I I INI lllll I 

Page 420 of 499 




j; subject: 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



T - QP S EGR E¥ /^ 



//NOFORN 



“[i]t is OMS’s view that based on our limited experience and the extensive 
experience of the military with these techniques, the program in place has 
effectively avoided severe physical pain and suffering, and should continue to 
do so. Application of the thirteen techniques 2362 has not to date resulted in any 
severe or permanent physical injury (or any injury other than transient 
bruising), and we do not expect this to change.” 2363 

In May 2005, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General Steven 
Bradbury signed three memoranda that relied on information provided by the CIA that was 
inconsistent with CIA’s operational records. On May 10, 2005, Bradbury signed two 
memoranda analyzing the statutory prohibition on torture with regard to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques and to the use of the interrogation techniques in combination. 2364 On 
May 30, 2005, Bradbury signed another memorandum examining U.S. obligations under the 
Convention Against Torture. 2365 The memoranda approved 13 techniques: (1) dietary 
manipulation, (2) nudity, (3) attention grasp, (4) walling, (5) facial hold, (6) facial slap or insult 
slap, (7) abdominal slap, (8) cramped confinement, (9) wall standing, (10) stress positions, (11) 
water dousing, (12) sleep deprivation (more than 48 hours), and (13) the waterboard. The three 
memoranda relied on numerous CIA representations that, as detailed elsewhere, were 
incongruent with CIA records, including: (1) the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques 
would be used only when the interrogation team “considers them necessary because a detainee is 
withholding important, actionable intelligence or there is insufficient time to try other 
techniques,” (2) the use of the techniques “is discontinued if the detainee is judged to be 
consistently providing accurate intelligence or if he is no longer believed to have actionable 
intelligence,” (3) the “use of the techniques usually ends after just a few days when the detainee 
begins participating,” (4) the interrogation techniques “would not be used on a detainee not 
reasonably thought to possess important, actionable intelligence that could not be obtained 
otherwise,” and (5) the interrogation process begins with “an open, non-threatening approach” to 
discern if the CIA detainee would be cooperative. 2366 



2362 The OLC was, at the time, analyzing the legality of 13 techniques, including the 10 techniques outlined in the 
OLC’s August 1, 2002, memoran dum, and additional techniques for which the CIA sought OLC approval in 2004. 

2363 Letter from HHHH" 



|, Associate General Counsel, CIA, to Steve Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 4, 2005. 

2364 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 
1 8 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al 
Qaeda Detainee (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 9); Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, 
Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of 
Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to the Combined Use of Certain 
Techniques in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 10). 

2365 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 1 1). 



immediately 
34491 (051400Z 



2366 All of these assertions were inaccurate. See Volume III for examples of CIA detainees beinj 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, including | 

MAR 03). See also Volume III for details on other interrogations in 2003, when at least six detainees that year were 
stripped and shackled, nude, in the standing stress position for sleep deprivation or subjected to other enhanced 



interrogation techniques prior to being que stioned. 

TOP SECRET// 



They included Asadullah (D IRECTOR 

//NOFORN 



FEB 



Page 421 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



flNOFORN 



The OLC memoranda also relied on CIA representations regarding 
specific interrogation techniques that were incongruent with the operational history of the 
program. For example, the CIA informed the OLC that it maintained a 75 degree minimum 
room temperature for nude detainees as “a matter of policy,” with a minimum of 68 degrees in 
the case of technical problems. This information was inconsistent with CIA practice both before 
and after the CIA’s representations to the OLC. 2367 The OLC relied on the CIA representation 
that standing sleep deprivation would be discontinued in the case of significant swelling of the 
lower extremities (edema), whereas in practice the technique was repeatedly not stopped when 
edema occurred. 2368 The OLC also repeated CIA representations that constant light was 
necessary for security, even though the CIA had subjected detainees to constant darkness. 2369 
Additional CIA representations accepted by the OLC — and found to be inconsistent with CIA 
practice — related to: (1) the exposure of nude detainees to other detainees and detention facility 
staff, 2370 (2) the use of water dousing — specifically the inaccurate representation that the 
technique did not involve immersion, (3) the use of shackles in standing sleep deprivation, (4) 
the likelihood of hallucinations during sleep deprivation, (5) the responsibility of medical 
personnel to intervene when standing sleep deprivation results in hallucinations, and (6) the 
purpose and the use of diapers on CIA detainees. 2371 



(T8/^||||^^mMF) The OLC repeated the CIA’s representations that “the effect of the 
waterboard is to induce a sensation of drowning,” that “the detainee experiences this sensation 
even if he is aware that he is not actually drowning,” and that “as far as can be determined, [Abu 




Abu Hudhaifa^^^ 

|; and Majid Khan 
39077 (271719Z MAY 03)). 



2367 Letter from 



:TC Legal 



2004 (DTS #2009-1809). See, for exa mple, 
31429(1613032 DEC 02); 




MAR 03)); S uleiman Abdullah 

APR 03 »; 
1241 



to Acting Assistan t Attor ney General Levin, December 30, 
31118 

10006 (070902Z DEC 02); [REDACTED] 33962 (211724ZFEB 




34031 (231242Z FEB 03); 




Email to 
2004. Email to 
March 9, 2004. 

2368 See, for example, 



AR 03); DIRECTOR 

; from: [R EDACTED]; subject: Medical Evaulation/Update 

; from: [REDACTED]; subject: Medical Evaluation/Update 

|; from: [REDACTEDksubiect: Medical Evaluation/Update 
2347 (300624Z MAY 05); ^■■■1797 (021612Z DEC 05). 
10909 (20191 8Z MAR 03)T^^H 2622 (230851Z AUG 07) 



34575 

MAR 03). Email to: 

(047 ); dat e: March |, 2004. 

(047); date: March 8, 



(047); date: 



2369 According to a CIA cable, cells at DETENTION SITE COBALT were “blacked out a t all times using curtains 
)lus painted exteri or windows. And do uble doors. The lights are never turned on.” (See \~ 

1 28246 1 



■HP9MT) Upon finding Ramzi bin al-Shibh “cowering in the comer, shivering” when 
the light in his cell burned out, interrogators decided to use darkness as an interrogation technique. He was then 
placed in sleep deprivation “standing, shackled feet and hands, with hands over his head, naked, in total darkness.” 




10521 (19 1750Z FEB 03); 
interview of 




10525 (200840Z FEB 03). 

[CIA OFFICER 1], December 19, 2002. CIA Interrogation 



Program Draft Course Materials, March 11, 2003, p. 28. CTC/RDG Interrogation Program, December 15, 2003. 

director! 



(251609Z JUL 02). See also “Standard Interr ogation Techniqu es,” attachment to email from: 
|; to: Scott W. Muller, John Rizzo, [REDACTED], \ 
discussion; date: July 19, 2004. 



2371 Letter from ^I^^V^TC Legal | 

2004 (DTS #2009- 1 809). 

TOP SECRET// 



|; subject: revised interrogation 
to Acting Assistant Attorney General Levin, December 30, 



//NOFORN 



Page 422 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET# 



//NOF Q RN 



Zubaydah and KSM] did not experience physical pain or, in the professional judgment of 
doctors, is there any medical reason to believe they would have done so.” The OLC further 
accepted that physical sensations associated with waterboarding, such as choking, “end when the 
application ends.” 2372 This information is incongruent with CIA records. According to CIA 
records, Abu Zubaydah’ s waterboarding sessions “resulted in immediate fluid intake and 
involuntary leg, chest and arm spasms” and “hysterical pleas.” 2373 A medical officer who 
oversaw the interrogation of KSM stated that the waterboard technique had evolved beyond the 
“sensation of drowning” to what he described as a “series of near drownings.” 2374 Physical 
reactions to waterboarding did not necessarily end when the application of water was 
discontinued, as both Abu Zubaydah and KSM vomited after being subjected to the 
waterboard. 2375 Further, as previously described, during at least one waterboard session, Abu 
Zubaydah “became completely unresponsive, with bubbles rising through his open, full mouth.” 
He remained unresponsive after the waterboard was rotated upwards. Upon medical 
intervention, he regained consciousness and expelled “copious amounts of liquid.” 2376 The CIA 
also relayed information to the OLC on the frequency with which the waterboard could be used 
that was incongruent with past operational practice. 2377 



The May 10, 2005, memorandum analyzing the individual use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques accepted the CIA’s representations that CIA 
interrogators are trained for “approximately four weeks,” and that “all personnel directly 
engaged in the interrogation of persons detained... have been appropriately screened (from the 



2372 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 
18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al 
Qaeda Detainee (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 9); Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, 
Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of 
Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 18 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to the Combined Use of Certain 
Techniques in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 10); Memorandum for 
John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal 
Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States 
Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the 
Int errogation of High ValueAlQaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 1 1). 

2373 ^jjj^ 10643JMB^UG 02); 10644 (2012 35Z AUG 02) 

2374 See email from: to: cc: 



April 10, 2003, at 5:59: 27 PM. 




|; subject: More; date: 

and [REDACTED]; 
10803 (131 929Z MAR 03). 

■■■ 10803 (131929Z MAR 03). 
and [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Departure; date: March 6, 
|, OMS; to [REDACTED] and [RE DACTED]; subjec t: Re: 

OMS; to: 



2375 



m 10644 (201235Z AUG 02); email from: [REDACTEDhto: 
subject: Re: So it begins; date: August 4, 2002, at 09:45:09 AM; BKIlllflllf 
2376 See Abu Zu baydah and KSM d etainee re views in V olume III, including 
See email from: 

2003, at 7:11:59 PM; email from: 



Acceptable lower ambient temperatures; date: March 7, 2003, at 8:22 PM; email from: 

[REDACTED] and [RE DACTED]; subje ct: Re: Talking Points for review and comment; date: August 13, 2004, at 
10:22 AM; email from: 



|; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and 
[REDACTED]; subject Re: Discussion with Dan Levin- AZ; date: October 26, 2004, at 6:09 PM. 

2377 Letter from |^|HCTC Legal 



to Acting Assistant Attorney General Dan Levin, August 19, 
2004 (DTS# 2009-1809). The OLC, having been informed by the CIA that 40 seconds was the maximum length of 
a single waterboard application, noted that “you have informed us that this maximum has rarely been reached.” This 
is inaccurate. KSM was subjected to 40-s econd exposures at least 19 times. 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi mu i 

Page 423 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 




medical, psychological and security standpoints).” 2378 The CIA representations about training 
and screening were incongruent with the operational history of the CIA program. CIA records 
indicate that CIA officers and contractors who conducted CIA interrogations in 2002 did not 
undergo any interrogation training. The first interrogator training course did not begin until 
November 12, 2002, by which time at least 25 detainees had been taken into CIA custody. 2379 
Numerous CIA interrogators and other CIA personnel associated with the program had either 
suspected or documented personal and professional problems that raised questions about their 
judgment and CIA employment. This group of officers included individuals who, among other 
issues, had engaged in inappropriate detainee interrogations, had workplace anger management 
issues, and had reportedly admitted to sexual assault. 2380 

2378 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 
1 8 U.S.C. Sections 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May be Used in the Intenogation of a High Value al 
QaecU^etainee (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 9). As described in this summary, when ||^^fj^|CTC Legal, ^||| 

insisted that CTC Legal vet and review the background of CIA personnel involved in the CIA’s 
inte^ogations, he directly linked this review to the legality of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

wrote: “we will be forced to Disapprove [sic] the participation of specific personnel in the use of 
enhanced techniques unless we have ourselves vetted them and are satisfied with their qualifications and suitability 
for what are clearly unusual measures that are lawful only when practiced correctly by personnel whose records 
clearly demonstrat^he^ that role.” The chief of CTC, Jose Rodriguez, objected to this proposal. See 

email from: ^^^^^^HHH^kcTC/LGL; to: [REDACTED]; cc: Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED]7^^^^^^^^B|H|^ubiect: EYES ONLY; date: November 2002, at 03:13:01 PM; email 
from: Jose Rodri^uez^^^^HliH HCTC/LGL; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], ■■■^^^Hlubject: EYES ONLY; date: November 2002, at 04:27 PM. 

2379 The training to conduct the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques required only approximately 65 hours of 
classroom and operational instruction. December 4, 2002, Training Report, High Value Target Interrogation and 
Exploitation (HVTIE) Trainin^eminar 12-18 Nov 02, (pilot running). 

2380 Among other abuses, bad engaged in “ Russian Roulette” with a det ainee. (See Memorandum for 

Chie^Sta^and Operations Branch from [REDACTED], April 3, 1980, Subject: 

■^■l984^Memorandum forlnspectorGeneral from [REDACTED], Inspector, via Deputy 
Inspector Generafre^^^^^^l, lG-j84.)^^^^^^BBB^^IA OFFICER2fwhothreatened‘Abd al- 
Rahim al-Nashiri with a gun and a power drill, * 

He was sent home short of tour twice — once for 
and again, a few months before interrogating al-Nashiri, for engaging in 



l 



91638 



|REDACTED]J 

C%'-^M60500 





1 




59478 






m 


mmnan 









fcjAfrom [REDACTED], 
U ^j; DIRECTOR 

59479HHHIBH|H 

IfjjtREDACIEirfl 



[REDACTED], 



,by [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], 



See email from: 

[REDACTED]; to [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and [REDACTED]; subject: 



Page 424 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




















UNCLASSIFIED 




Finally, the OLC accepted a definition of “High Value Detainee’' 
conveyed by the CIA 2381 that limited the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to 
“senior member[s]” of al-Qa’ida or an associated terrorist group who have “knowledge of 
imminent terrorist threats” or “direct involvement in planning and preparing” terrorist actions. 
However, at the time of the OLC opinion, the CIA had used its enhanced interrogation 
techniques on CIA detainees who were found neither to have knowledge of imminent threats nor 
to have been directly involved in planning or preparing terrorist actions. Some were not senior 
al-Qa’ida members, 2382 or even members of al-Qa’ida. 2383 Others were never suspected of 
having information on, or a role in, terrorist plotting and were suspected only of having 
information on the location of UBL or other al-Qa’ida figures, 2384 or weresimplybelieved to 
have been present at a suspected al-Qa’ida guesthouse. 2385 A year later, ^^|^^|CTC Legal 
wrote to Acting Assistant Attorney General Steven Bradbury suggesting a new standard that 
more closely reflected actual practice by allowing for the CIA detention and interrogation of 
detainees to be based on the belief that the detainee had information that could assist in locating 
senior al-Qa’ida leadership. 2386 The OLC modified the standard in a memorandum dated July 
20, 2007. 2387 By then, the last CIA detainee, Muhammad Rahim, had already entered CIA 
custody. 2388 

The May 30, 2005, OLC memorandum analyzing U.S. obligations 
under the Convention Against Torture relied heavily on CIA representations about the 
intelligence obtained from the program. Many of these representations were provided in a 
March 2, 2005, CIA memorandum known as the “Effectiveness Memo,” in which the CIA 
advised that the CIA program “works and the techniques are effective in producing foreign 
intelligence.” The “Effectiveness Memo” stated that “|w]e assess we would not have succeeded 
in overcoming the resistance of Khalid Shaykh Muhammad (KSM), Abu Zubaydah, and other 
equally resistant high-value terrorist detainees without applying, in a careful, professional and 



[REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], 



For mo re information, se e Volume III. 

2381 Fax to Acting Assistant Attorney General Levin from January 4, 2005 (DTS #2009-1809). 

2382 See detainee reviews for Suleiman Abdullah and Janat Gul in Volume III for additional information. 

2383 See detainee review for Rafiq bin Bashir bin Halul Al-Hami in Volume III for additional information. 

2384 See detainee review for Ridha Ahmad al-Najjar in Volume III for additional information. 

2385 See detainee reviews for Tawfiq Nasir Awad al-Bihani and Arsala Khan in Volume III for additional 

information. 

2386 Letter from HmUCTC Legal 
(DTS #2009-1809). 

2387 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 

Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Ta b 14). 

2388 B 6439 (■■■■); 7516 

Rahim entered CIA i n Iml mi Ini B INI 



to Acting Assistant Attorney General Bradbury, May 23, 2006 



Page 425 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



Z /NOF Q R N 



safe manner, the full range of interrogation techniques.” 2389 The CIA “Effectiveness Memo” 
further stated that “[p]rior to the use of enhanced techniques against skilled resistors [sic] like 
KSM and Abu Zubaydah — the two most prolific intelligence producers in our control — CIA 
acquired little threat information or significant actionable intelligence information.” As 
described in this summary, the key information provided by Abu Zubaydah that the CIA 
attributed to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was provided prior to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. KSM was subjected to CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques within minutes of his questioning, and thus had no opportunity to divulge information 
prior to their use. As described elsewhere, CIA personnel concluded the waterboard was not an 
effective interrogation technique against KSM. 2390 

(TS/ZH|^^^^|^^|^ZNF) Under a section entitled, “Results,” the CIA “Effectiveness Memo” 
represented that the “CIA’s use of DOJ-approved enhanced interrogation techniques, as part of a 
comprehensive interrogation approach, has enabled CIA to disrupt terrorist plots, capture 
additional terrorists, and collect a high volume of critical intelligence on al-Qa’ida.” It then 
listed 1 1 examples of “critical intelligence” acquired “ after applying enhanced interrogation 
techniques”: 2391 the “Karachi Plot,” the “Heathrow Plot,” the “Second Wave,” the “Guraba 
Cell,” “Issa al-Hindi,” “Abu Talha al-Pakistani,” “Hambali’s Capture,” “Jafaar al-Tayyar,” the 
“Dirty Bomb Plot,” the “Shoe Bomber,” and intelligence obtained on “Shkai, Pakistan.” These 
representations of “effectiveness” were almost entirely inaccurate and mirrored other inaccurate 
information provided to the White House, Congress, and the CIA inspector general. 2392 In 
addition, on April 15, 2005, the CIA provided the OLC with an eight-page document entitled, 
“Briefing Notes on the Value of Detainee Reporting.” The CIA “Briefing Notes” document 
repeats many of the same CIA representations in the “Effectiveness Memo,” but added additional 
inaccurate information related to the capture of Iyman Faris. 2393 



The OLC’s May 30, 2005, memorandum relied on the CIA’s 
inaccurate representations in the “Effectiveness Memo” and the “Briefing Notes” document in 
determining that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques did not violate the Fifth 
Amendment’s prohibition on executive conduct that “shocks the conscience,” indicating that this 
analysis was a “highly context-specific and fact-dependent question.” The OLC also linked its 



: 89 CIA Memor andum for Steve Bradbury at the Department of Justice, dated March 2, 2005, from H 
H HI Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center, subject “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist 
Interrogation Te chniques.” 

2390 Interview of 
15,2003; Intervie w of 
October 22, 2003; 




[by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, May 
, by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector G ene ral, 
11715 (201047Z MAY 03); Sametime Communication, 



HpHH 15/Aug/06, 10:28:38 to 10:58:00; Interview of 
Office of the Inspector General, April 3, 2003; Sametime Communication, 




REDACTED ] and [REDACTED], 
and [REDACTED], 



|, by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and 



02/May/05, 14:51:48 to 15:17:39; Interview of 
[REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 20, 2003. 

2391 Emphasis in the original. 

2392 See list of 20 CIA representations included in this summary and additional details in Volume II. Representations 
regarding Abu Talha al-Pakistani, which were less frequent, are also described this summary and in greater detail in 
Volumes II and III. 



2393 April 15, 2005,10:47AM, fax to DOJ Command Center for 
Department of Justice, from 



Office of Legal Counsel, U.S. 

Legal Group, DCI Counterterrorist Center. Cover note: 
Answers to some of your questions,” with attachment entitled “Briefing Notes o n the Value of Detainee Reporting.” 

TOP SECRE T/zBBBBBJBBIBBPzNOFORN 

Page 426 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



analysis of whether the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques was “constitutionally 
arbitrary” to the representation by the CIA that its interrogation program produced “substantial 
quantities of otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence.” 2394 The CIA’s representations to the 
OLC that it obtained “otherwise unavailable actionable intelligence” from the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques were inaccurate. 2395 

The OLC memorandum repeated specific inaccurate CIA 
representations, including that the waterboard was used against Abu Zubaydah and KSM “only 
after it became clear that standard interrogation techniques were not working”; that the 
information related to the “Guraba Cell” in Karachi was “otherwise unavailable actionable 
intelligence”; that Janat Gul was a “high value detainee”; and that information provided by 
Hassan Ghul regarding the al-Qa’ida presence in Shkai, Pakistan, was attributable to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 2396 Citing CIA information, the OLC memorandum also 
stated that Abu Zubaydah was al-Qa’ida’ s “third or fourth highest ranking member” and had 
been involved “in every major terrorist operation carried out by al Qaeda,” and that “again, once 
enhanced techniques were employed,” Abu Zubaydah “provided significant information on two 
operatives... who planned to build and detonate a ‘dirty bomb’ in the Washington DC area.” 

The OLC repeated additional inaccurate information from the CIA related to KSM’s reporting, 
including representations about the “Second Wave” plotting, the Heathrow Airport plotting, and 
the captures of Hambali, Iyman Faris, and Sajid Badat. 2397 The OLC relied on CIA 
representations that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against ‘Abd al- 
Rahim al-Nashiri produced “notable results as early as the first day,” despite al-Nashiri providing 
reporting on the same topics prior to entering CIA custody. The OLC also repeated inaccurate 
CIA representations about statements reportedly made by Abu Zubaydah and KSM. 2398 



2394 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees. 

2395 See specific CIA examples of the “Results” of using the “CIA’s us e of DQJ-approved enha nced interrogation 

im Legal Group, DCI 



techniques” in March 2, 2005, Memorandum for Steve Bradbury from | 

Counterterrorist Center, “Effectiveness of the CIA Counterterrorist Interrogation Techniques.” The specific 
representations in the “Briefing Notes” document were similar to those in the CIA’s “Effectiveness Memo” and 
included references to detainee reporting on Jose Padilla, Hambali, Dhiren Barot, Sajid Badat, Iyman Faris, Jaffar al- 
Tayyar, the Heathrow Airport plotting, and the Karachi plotting. 

2396 For example, as detailed elsewhere in this review, Hassan Gul provided detailed information on al-Qa’ida’s 
presence in Shkai, Pakistan, prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

2397 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees. 

2398 The OLC memorandum stated that “[b]oth KSM and Zubaydah had ‘expressed their belief that the general US 
population was ‘weak,’ lacked resilience, and would be unable to ‘do what was necessary’ to prevent the terrorists 
from succeeding in their goals.’” As described elsewhere in this summary, and in more detail in the full Committee 
Study, CIA records indicate that KSM and Abu Zubaydah did not make these statements. The memorandum also 
repeated CIA representations about KSM’s comment, “Soon, you will know,” and Abu Zubaydah’s reported 
statements about being “permitted by Allah” to provide information. As described in this summary, these 
representations are not supported by CIA r ecords. 

mi 1 1 1 iii i mi i >n hi 

Page 427 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



^ Finally, the May 30, 2005, OLC memorandum referenced the CIA 
Inspector General May 2004 Special Review, stating: “we understand that interrogations have 
led to specific, actionable intelligence as well as a general increase in the amount of intelligence 
regarding al Qaeda and its affiliates.” 2399 The OLC memorandum cited pages in the Special 
Review that included inaccurate information provided by CIA personnel to the CIA’s OIG, 
including representations related to Jose Padilla and Binyam Muhammad, Hambali and the “Al- 
Qa’idaccll in Karachi,” the Parachas, lyman Faris, Saleh al-Marri, Majid Khan, the Heathrow 
Airport plotting, and other “plots.” 2400 



E. After Passage of the Detainee Treatment Act, OLC Issues Opinion on CIA Conditions of 
Confinement, Withdraws Draft Opinion on the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation 
Techniques After the U.S. Supreme Court Case of Hamdan v. Rumsfeld 



On December 19, 2005, anticipating the passage of the Detainee 
Treatment Act, Acting CIA General Counsel John Rizzo requested that the OLC review whether 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, as well as the conditions of confinement at CIA 
detention facilities, would violate the Detainee Treatment Act. 2401 In April 2006, attorneys at 
OLC completed initial drafts of two legal memoranda addressing these questions. 2402 In June 
2006, however, the U.S. Supreme Court case of Hamdan v. Rumsfeld prompted the OLC to 
withdraw its draft memorandum on the impactofthe Detainee Treatment Act on the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. As Legal explained, the OLC would 

prepare “a written opinion ‘if we want’... but strongly implied we shouldn’t seek it.” 2403 As 
described in a July 2009 report of the Department of Justice Office of Professional 
Responsibility, the Administration determined that, after the Hamdan decision, it would need 
new legislation to support the continued use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2404 



Even as it withdrew its draft opinion on the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, the OLC continued to analyze whether the CIA’s conditions of 
confinement violated the Detainee Treatment Act. To support this analysis, the CIA asserted to 
the OLC that loud music and white noise, constant light, and 24-hour shackling were all for 



2M>>) Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 1 6 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees. 

2400 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of 
United States Obligations Under Article 1 6 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees, pp. 10-11, citing 1G Special Review, pp. 85-91. 

2401 The Detainee Treatment Act passed on December 30, 2005. Letter from Senior Deputy General Counsel John 
Rizzo to Acting Assistant Attorney General Bradbury, December 19, 2005 (DTS #2009-1809). 



Legal Group, CIA Counterterrorism Center to DOJ Command 
|, John Rizzo; subject: FW: Summary 



2402 Apri 1 1 9, 2006, Fax from 
Center for Steve Bradbury (DTS #2009- 1 809). 

to: [REDACTED|; cc: 



2401 Email from: 



of Hamdan Decision; date: June 30, 2006, at 4:44 PM. 

2404 Department of Justice Office of Professional Responsibility; Report, Investigation into the Office of Legal 
Counsel’s Memoranda Concerning Issues Relating to the Central Intelligence Agency’s Use of ‘Enhanced 
Interrogation Techniques’ on Suspected Terrorists, July 29, 2009 (DTS #2010-1058). 



T O P- SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 428 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET# 



//NOFOR - N 



security purposes, that shaving was for security and hygiene purposes and was conducted only 
upon intake and not as a “punitive step,” that detainees were not exposed to an “extended period” 
of white noise, and that CIA detainees had access to a wide array of amenities. 2405 This 
information is ineongruent with CIA records. Detainees were routinely shaved, sometimes as an 
aid to interrogation; detainees who were “participating at an acceptable level” were permitted to 
grow their hair and beards. 2406 The CIA had used music at decibels exceeding the 
representations to the OLC. The CIA had also used specific music to signal to a detainee that 
another interrogation was about to begin. 2407 Numerous CIA detainees were subjected to the 
extended use of white noise. 2408 The CIA further inaccurately represented that “[mjedical 
personnel will advise ending sleep deprivation in the event the detainee app ears to be 
experiencinghalluc^^ transient or not.” 2409 In a May 18, 2006, letter, 

Legal, wrote to the Department of Justice that “some of these conditions 

provide the additional benefit of setting a detention atmosphere conducive to continued 
intelligence collection from the detainee.” While the letter referred generally to “constant light 
in the cells, use of white noise, use of shackles, hooding, and shaving/barbering,” it described an 
intelligence collection purpose only for shaving, which “allows interrogators a clear view of the 
terrorist-detainee’s facial clues.” 2410 



(TS/4|^^H||H#NF) On August 31, 2006, the OLC finalized two legal analyses on the 
conditions of confinement at CIA detention sites. The first was a memorandum that evaluated 
whether six detention conditions in the CIA’s detention program were consistent with the 
Detainee Treatment Act. 2411 The second, provided in the form of a letter, concluded that those 
same six conditions did not violate the requirements of Common Article 3 of the Geneva 



2405 Letter from Senior Deputy General Counsel John Rizzo to Acting Assistant Attorney General Bradbury, 
December 19, 2005 (DTS #2009-1809). January 25, 2006, Lette^^tev^Bradbu^^cting Assistant Attorney 
General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice, from HHHCTC Legal, CIA (DTS 

■■■10361 
(212005Z JUN 05); 

2407 As one example, CIA records indicate that in the CIA interrogation of Ramzi bin al-Shibh, the “the Blues 

Brothers rendition of ‘Rawhide’ [was] played.” CIA records state that bin al-Shibh’s reaction to hearing the song 
was evidence of his con ditioning, a s bin al-Shibh “knows wh en he hears the music where he is going and what is 
going to happen.” (See ■■■ 10602 (262020Z FEB 03); 10591 (25200 2Z FEB 03); [REDA CTED] 

1889 (091823Z MAR 03); [REDACTED] 1924 (151729Z MAR04)T^^^1 10361 ■■■■■■) “Loud 
noise” was also used to “prevent concentrating, planning, and derailing of the exploitation/interrogation process with 
interrogation countermeasures (resistance).” See, for example, detainee reviews detailing the detention and 
interrogations of Lilli e and Hamba li in Volume III. 

2408 See , for example, ■■■■ 2505 (272059Z JUN 05). The amenities described by the CIA to the OLC were 
not available to detainees duringeariieMter^on^Dhe program. 

2409 April 23, 2006, Fax from ■{^■■■^ ■■ Legal Group, CIA Counterterrorism Center to DOJ Command 
Center for Steve Bradbury (DTS #2009-1809). 

Steven G. Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, from 
TC Legal, CIA, re: Request for Information on Security Measures (DTS # 2009-1809). 
2411 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, 
Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 31 , 2006, Re: Application of the Detainee 
Treatment Act to Conditions of Confinement at Central Intelligence Agency Detention Facilities (DTS #2009-1810, 



2410 



1 8, 2006, Letter to 




#1809-2009). 

2406 See, for example, 31369 (151028Z D EC 02); 

HEADQUARTERS ^^Kl51955Z SEP 05); HEADQUARTERS ■■ 
HEADQUARTERS (202036Z JUN 05). 



Tab 13). 



TOP SE C RET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 429 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Conventions. 2412 The OLC relied on the CIA’s representations related to conditions of 
confinement for its analysis. 2413 The OLC wrote that “underlying our analysis of all these 
methods [conditions of confinement] is our understanding that the CIA provides regular and 
thorough medical and psychological care to the detainees in its custody.” 2414 As detailed in this 
summary, the lack of emergency medical care for CIA detainees was a significant challenge for 
the CIA. 2415 

The August 31, 2006, OLC memorandum applying the terms of the 
Detainee Treatment Act to the conditions of confinement at CIA detention facilities stated that 
“over the history of the prog ram, the CIA has detained a total of 96 individuals.” This was based 
on a representation made by HHH|CTC Legal on April 23, 2006. 2416 As of the date of the 
OLC memorandum, the CIA had detained at least 118 individuals. The OLC memorandum also 
stated that “we understand that, once the CIA assesses that a detainee no longer possesses 
significant intelligence value, the CIA seeks to move the detainee into alternative detention 
arrangements.” CIA records indicate that detainees had remained in CIA custody long after the 
CIA had determined that they no longer possessed significant intelligence. Finally, the OLC 
memorandum repeated a number of earlier inaccurate CIA representations on the effectiveness of 
the program, citing both the CIA’s “Effectiveness Memo” and its own May 30, 2005, 
memorandum. Notably, the August 31, 2006, OLC memorandum repeated the same inaccurate 
representation, which first appeared in an August 2002 OLC memorandum, that Abu Zubaydah 
was al-Qa’ida’s “third or fourth highest ranking member” and had been involved “in every major 
terrorist operation carried out by al Qaeda.” As described, CIA records as early as 2002 did not 
support these representations, and two weeks prior to the issuance of the August 2006 
memorandum, the CIA had published an intelligence assessment stating that Abu Zubaydah had 
been rejected by al-Qa’ida and explaining how the CIA had come to “miscast Abu Zubaydah as a 
‘senior al-Qa’ida lieutenant.’” 2417 



2412 Letter for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Acting 
Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 31, 2006 (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 12). 

2413 The OLC did not apply the Detainee Treatment Act or Common Article 3 to the use of shaving or other 
conditions of confinement in terms of their use as an interrogation technique. The OLC stated that while “the 
primary purpose of the conditions of confinement we consider here is to maintain the security of the CIA’s detention 
facilities... [m]any of these conditions may also ease the obtaining of crucial intelligence information from the 
detainees.” Nonetheless, the OLC concluded that “the security rationale alone is sufficient to justify each of the 
conditions of confinement in question.” See memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 
31, 2006, Re: Application of the detainee Treatment Act to Conditions of Confinement at Central Intelligence 
Agency Detention Facilities (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 13). 

2414 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, 
Acting Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 31, 2006, Re: Application of the Detainee 
Treatment Act to Conditions of Confinement at Central Intelligence Agency Detention Facilities (DTS #2009-1810 
Tab 13). 

2415 For additional detailed information, see Volume I and Volume III. 

^^April 23, 2006, Fax to DOJ Command Center for Steve Bradbury, Office of Legal Counsel, from^HI 
HH Legal Group, CIA Counterterrorism Center. 

24,7 CIA Intelligence Assessment, August 16, 2006, “Countering Misconceptions About Training Camps in 
Afghanistan, 1990-2001.” For additional details, see the Abu Zubaydah detaine e review in Volume III. 

mi 1 1 iii i "i n »i i m i 

Page 430 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



F. July 2007 OLC Memorandum Relies on Inaccurate CIA Representations Regarding CIA 

Interrogations and the Effectiveness of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; 

CIA Misrepresents Congressional Views to the Department of Justice 

(U) On July 20, 2007, the OLC issued a memorandum applying the War Crimes Act, the 
Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. The memorandum noted that, while the Hamdan decision 
“was contrary to the President’s prior determination that Common Article 3 does not apply to an 
armed conflict across national boundaries with an international terrorist organization such as al 
Qaeda,” this challenge to the CIA program was resolved by the Military Commissions Act, 
which “left responsibility for interpreting the meaning and application of Common Article 3, 
except for the grave breaches defined in the amended War Crimes Act, to the President.” 2418 

The OLC memorandum determined that six proposed interrogation 
techniques were legal: dietary manipulation, extended sleep deprivation, the facial hold, the 
attention grasp, the abdominal slap, and the insult (or facial) slap. The memorandum accepted 
the CIA’s representation that, over the life of the program, the CIA had detained 98 individuals, 
of whom 30 had been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2419 At the time 
of the OLC memorandum the CIA had detained at least 119 individuals, of whom at least 38 had 
been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2420 The inaccurate statistics 
provided by the CIA to the OLC were used to support OLC’s conclusion that the program was 
“proportionate to the government interest involved,” as required by the “shocks the conscience” 
test. The OLC also noted that “careful screening procedures are in place to ensure that enhanced 
techniques will be used only in the interrogations of agents or members of al Qaeda or its 
affiliates who are reasonably believed to possess critical intelligence that can be used to prevent 
future terrorist attacks against the United States and its interests.” 2421 In practice, numerous 
individuals had been detained by the CIA and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 



24i8 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

24,9 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2420 Although all 1 19 known CIA detainees had entered CIA custody by July 20, 2007, Muhammad Rahim, the last 

detainee, had not yet been subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques by t he time of the O LC 
memorandum. M uhammad Rahim was rendered to CIAcustodyonJuly 2007. (See 6439 

(■■■■■); ■■■■■■■ 7516 (^^^■■1).) Interrogators began the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques on Rahim on July 21, 2007; the day after the OLC Memorandum was issued. See 
WtKM 2467 (21 1341 Z JUL 07). 

2421 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 

Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 




Page 431 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



techniques, despite doubts and questions surrounding their knowledge of terrorist threats and the 
location of senior al-Qa’ida leadership. Examples include, among others: Asadullah, 2422 Mustafa 
al-Hawsawi, 2423 Abu Hudhaifa, 2424 Arsala Khan, 2425 ABU TALHA AL-MAGREBI and ABU 
BAHAR AL-TURKI, 2426 Janat Gul, 2427 Ahmed Ghailani, 2428 Sharif al-Masri, 2429 and Sayyid 
Ibrahim. 2430 



2422 Interrogators had asked CIA Headquarters for the assessments supporting the decision to subject Asadullah to 

the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, noting thaChtwoukH^ help t o the interrogator to know 

what concrete fact and what is good analysis/W5££j|H[|^^^^H^^^H^3963 

also 34098 34812]|^^H|BH-) 

In response, ALEC Station acknowledged that “ [t]o be sure, our case that A sadullah should have a good sense of bin 
Ladin’s location is circumstantial.” {See ALEC flH ) The following day, interrogators 

commentecHh^ he simply does not kno w the [locational information on AQ leaders].” See 

2423 Following al-Hawsawi’s first interrogation session, Chief of Interrogations asked CIA 

Headquarters for information on what al-Hawsawi actually “knows,” saying: “he does not appear to the [sic] be a 
person that is a financial mastermind. However, we lack facts with which to confront [al- Hawsawi], What we need 
at this point is substantive information vice supposition.” See 34757 (101742Z MAR 

03). 

2424 Although CIA records include no requests or approval cables, Abu Hudhaifa was subjected to ice water baths 

and 66 hours of standing sleep deprivation. He was rele ased because the CIA disco v ered he wa s likel y not the 
verson he was believed to be. See WASHINGTON DC 51303 



2425 CIA Headquarters initially resisted approving ArsalaKhan^scapture becau se of a lack of infor mation 

conbnuingthath^ a “continuing threat.” { See 169986 email from: 

to: and 

Approval to Capture i il i I I Ill Hi |iil I nl I that Arsala Khan was the individual 

sought by the CIA, interrogators subjected him to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques “to make a better 
assessmentj~egarding^ to start talking, or assess if our subject is, in fact the man we are looking for.” 

See ■■■■■■ 1 373 

2426 The true names of these detainees have been replaced with the capitalized pseudonyms AL-MAGREBI and AL- 

TURKI. At the time the two detainees were rendered t o CIA cu stody, the CIA was aware that they were then 
working for a foreign partner government. {See ALEC [REDACTED]; [REDACTED] 43773 

[REDACTED].) They were subjected to sleep deprivation and dietary manipulation until the CIA confirmed that 
the detainees had been trying t^ontacUh^IAforweeks to inform the CIA o f what they believed were pe nding al- 
Qa’ida terrorist attacks^5^eHH^HH|Bilil^l 2227 [REDACTED ]; 2233 
[REDACTED] J|^HHB^^^^H2185[REDACTED]; HEADQUAFfTERS^IHl^EDACTED] ; 

2232 [REDACTED].) After the CIA had determined that AL-MAGREBI and AL- 
TURKI should not be in CIA custody, the two detainees were held for additional months before 

they were released. See [REDACTED] 2025 [REDACTED]. 

2427 The case of Janat Gul is described above in the context of OLC advice in 2004 and afterwards. As Gul’s 

interrogators noted, “Team does not believe [Gul] is withholdingimminent th reat information , however team will 
continue to press [Gul] for that during each session.” See 1574 04). 

2428 The CIA’s assessment of Ghailani’s knowledge of terrorist threats was speculative. As one official noted, 

“[although Ghailani’s role in operational planning is unclear, his respected role in al-Qa’ida and presence in Shkai 
as recently as October 2003 may have provided him some knowledge a bout ongoing at tack planning against the 
United States homeland^n^heoperatives involved.” See email from: CTC/UBLD | 

(formerly ALEC||^HH|); to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: 
derog information for ODDO on Talha, Ghailani, Hamza Rabi’a and Abu Faraj; date: August 10, 2004. 

2429 As noted above, the credibility of the source implicating Sharif al-Masri, Janat Gul, and Ghailani’s connections 
to a pre-election plot was questioned by CIA officials prior to the application of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques against them. The source was later determined to have fabricated the information. 

2430 Five days after interrogators began using enhanced interrogation techniques against Sayyid Ibrahim, 
interrogators cabled CIA Headquarters req uesting information that would “defin itively link [Ibrahim] to nefarious 

t op 

Page 432 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






















UNCLASSIFIED 





The July 20, 2007, OLC memorandum also stated that the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques “are not the first option for CIA interrogators confronted even 
with a high value detainee.” 2431 As described in this summary, numerous CIA detainees were 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced or “standard” interrogation techniques on their first day of CIA 
custody, 2432 while other detainees provided significant information prior to the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. The OLC memorandum also accepted the CIA 
representation that “[t]he CIA generally does not ask questions during the administration of the 
techniques to which the CIA does not already know the answers,” that the CIA “asks for already 
known information” during the administration of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
and that when CIA personnel believe a detainee will cooperate, “the CIA would discontinue use 
of the techniques and debrief the detainee regarding matters on which the CIA is not definitely 
informed.” As the memorandum concluded, “[t]his approach highlights the intended 
psychological effects of the techniques and reduces the ability of the detainee to provide false 
information solely as a means to discontinue their application.” 2433 This description of the 
program was inaccurate. As described in this summary, and in more detail in the full Committee 
Study, CIA interrogators always questioned detainees during the application of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques seeking new information to which the CIA did not have 
answers, and numerous detainees fabricated information while being subjected to the 
interrogation techniques. 

The July 20, 2007, OLC memorandum repeated CIA 
representations that “many, if not all, of those 30 detainees” who had been subjected to CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques received counterinterrogation training, and that “al Qaeda 
operatives believe that they are morally permitted to reveal information once they have reached a 
certain limit of discomfort.” 2434 Neither of these representations is supported by CIA records. 



activity or kn owle dge by [Ibra him] of known nefarious activities of al-Qa’ida members, if this is possible.” (See 
miim 1324 04)-) Without receiving a response, they continued to subject Ibrahim to the 

CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. CIA Headquarters, which rejected an assessment from two debriefers that 
Ibrahim was, “at best... a low-le vel facil itator,” would later indicate that it w as “uncertain” he would me et the 
requirements for U.S. militaiyoJH||^etention. See HEADQUARTERS HH HIHilHHfc 
HEADQUARTERS ■■ 

2431 The OLC further stated that “enhanced techniques would be used only as less harsh techniques fail or as 
interrogators run out of time in the face of an imminent threat, so that it would be unlikely that a detainee would be 
subjected to more duress than is reasonably necessary to elicit the information sought.” See Memorandum for John 
A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the 
Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May be 
Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 14). 

2432 See Volume IE for additional details. 

2433 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, horn Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2434 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 




Page 433 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 




The memorandum also repeated CIA representations that 
interrogators were “highly trained in carrying out the techniques,” and “psychologically screened 
to minimize the risk that an interrogator might misuse any technique.” These presumptions were 
central to the OLC’s determination that the limitations on interrogations contained in the Army 
Field Manual were not “dispositive evidence” that the CIA’s interrogation program fell outside 
“traditional executive behavior and contemporary practice,” an analysis required as part of the 
substantive due process inquiry. Specifically, the OLC distinguished U.S. military interrogations 
from the CIA program by stating that the CIA program “will be administered only by trained and 
experienced interrogators who in turn will apply the techniques only to a subset of high value 
detainees.” 2435 As described in this summary, and in greater detail in the full Committee Study, 
the CIA’s representations to the OLC were incongruent with the history of the CIA’s Detention 
and Interrogation Program with regard to the training, screening, and experience of interrogators, 
and the detainees against whom the CIA used its enhanced interrogation techniques. 

The July 2007 OLC memorandum based its legal analysis related 
to the six interrogation techniques under consideration on CIA representations that were 
incongruent with the operational history of the program. In reviewing whether standing sleep 
deprivation was consistent with the War Crimes Act, the OLC noted that its understanding that 
the technique would be discontinued “should any hallucinations or significant declines in 
cognitive functioning be observed” was “crucial to our analysis.” The memorandum repeated 
CIA representations that diapers employed during standing sleep deprivation “are used solely for 
sanitary and health reasons and not to humiliate the detainee,” and that, more generally, “[t]he 
techniques are not intended to humiliate or to degrade.” 2436 The OLC’s understanding, which, as 
described, was not consistent with the operational history of the CIA program, was part of its 
analysis related to the prohibition on “outrages upon personal dignity” under Common Article 3. 

As in the May 30, 2005 OLC memorandum, the July 20, 2007, 

OLC memorandum conducted an analysis of the “shocks the conscience” test under the Fifth 
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, emphasizing the fact-specific nature of the analysis. Citing 
both the CIA’s March 2005 “Effectiveness Memo” and the president’s September 6, 2006, 
speech describing the interrogation program, the July 2007 OLC memorandum repeated the CIA 
assertion that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques produced “otherwise unavailable 
intelligence.” It also repeated CIA representations related to KSM’s reporting on the “Second 
Wave” plotting and Abu Zubaydah’s reporting on Jose Padilla, both of which were 

Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2435 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2436 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 




Page 434 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



inaccurate. 2437 The OLC memorandum also stated that the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques had “revealed plots to blow up the Brooklyn Bridge and to release mass 
biological agents in our Nation’s largest cities.” 2438 

Finally, the July 20, 2007, OLC memorandum asserted — based on 
CIA representations — that members of Congress supported the CIA interrogation program, and 
that, by subsequently voting for the Military Commissions Act, those members effectively 
endorsed an interpretation of the Act that would be consistent with the continued use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. This interpretation of congressional intent also 
supported the OLC’s constitutional analysis, which stated that there could be “little doubt” that 
the Act “reflected an endorsement” from Congress that the CIA program “was consistent with 
contemporary practice, and therefore did not shock the conscience.” 2439 Specifically, the OLC 
memorandum noted that according to CIA representations, prior to the passage of the Military 
Commissions Act, “several Members of Congress, including the full memberships of the House 
and Senate Intelligence Committees and Senator McCain, were briefed by General Michael 
Hayden, director of the CIA, on the six techniques,” and that “in those classified and private 
conversations, none of the Members expressed the view that the CIA interrogation program 
should be stopped, or that the techniques at issue were inappropriate.” 2440 This representation 
was inaccurate. For example, according to CIA records, during a briefing on September 11, 
2006, Senator John McCain informed the CIA that he believed the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, including sleep deprivation and the waterboard, were “torture.” 2441 On September 



2437 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2438 Thig j s a reference to the CIA’s representation that KSM, “as a result of EITs,” provided critical and unique 

reporting on Iyman Faris and Majid Khan. As described briefly in this summary, and in greater detail in the full 
Committee Study, Iyman Faris was already under investigation, and Majid Khan was already in custody, before 
KSM mentioned the m. Khan himself revealed a discussion about poisoning reservoirs prior to his rendition to CIA 
custody. ( See ALEC II^B (210015Z MAR 03).) When Faris, who was likewise not in CIA custody, discussed a 
plot against the Brooklyn Bridge, the former ch ief of C TC's Bin Ladin Unit described it as “half-baked,” and “more 
of a nuisnance [sic] than a threat.” See WHD^J^^^242226^MA^03^nc^mail from: to: 

HUHHHIHL [redacted]; 

attacks in conus; date: March 25, 2003, at 6: 19: 1 8 AM). 

2439 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 



Tab 14). 



244° Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2441 Email from: cc: ■■■■■> [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTEDlIHBI^^BTrEDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Briefing for Senator John S. McCain (R-AZ); date: 
September 11, 2006, at 5:51 PM (“[Senator McCain] asked if I thought ‘sleep deprivation’ was torture. I responded 
that I did not and he then added that he had talked with a Marine Colonel friend of his and the Colonel had indicated 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 435 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



27, 2006, Senator Dianne Feinstein, a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 
wrote a letter to CIA Director Hayden stating that she was “unable to understand why the CIA 
needs to maintain this program.” 2442 On September 6, 2006, when the CIA provided its first and 
only briefing to the full Committee on the CIA program prior to the vote on the Military 
Commissions Act, Committee staff access was limited to the two Committee staff directors. 2443 
In May 2007, shortly after the CIA allowed additional Committee staff to be briefed on the 
program, other members of the Committee prepared and provided letters to Director Hayden. On 
May 1, 2007, Senator Russ Feingold wrote that “I cannot support the program on moral, legal or 
national security grounds.” 2444 On May 11, 2007, Senators Chuck Hagel, Dianne Feinstein, and 
Ron Wyden wrote a letter expressing their long-standing concerns with the program and their 
“deep discomfort with the use of EITs.” 2445 



it was and he believed his friend.”)- In another exchange, the officer who briefed Senator McCain was asked about 



the Senator’s 
“not totally.” 



losition. CIA officer 



‘so, is the senator on board?...” CIA officer 



“if he’s moved in our direction at all, you are a miracle worker... was it painful?” 



“Very much s o.” 
communication between I 



“is the issue the EITs still?” 



“Yep.” ( See Sametime 



|, 11 /Sep/06, 15:47:27 to 18:43:29.) The OLC 



specifically cited statements from Senator McCain that the Military Commissions Act “will allow the CIA to 
continue interrogating prisoners within the boundaries established in the bill.” Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, 
Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee 
Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain Techniques that May be Used by the 
CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 14). The OLC did not mention 
that McCain had specifically objected to the use of sleep deprivation. 

2442 Letter from Senator Dianne Feinstein to Director Hayden, September 27, 2006 (DTS #2006-3717). 

2443 Transcript of hearing of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, September 6, 2006 (DTS #2007-1336). 

2444 Letter from Senator Russ Feingold to Director Hayden, May 1, 2007 (DTS #2007-1858). 

2445 Letter from Senators Chuck Hagel, Diann^einsteh^n^Roi^Wyden^^ay 1 1 , 2007 (DTS #2007-2102). 

i iii 1 1 iii i i ii ii i mi i 

Page 436 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOE O R N 



VI. Review of CIA Representations to the Congress 

A. After Memorandum of Notification, the CIA Disavows Torture and Assures the 
Committee Will Be Notified of Every Individual Detained by the CIA 

Following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the signing 
of the September 17, 2001, Memorandum of Notification (MON), the Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence (“the Committee”) held a series of hearings and briefings on CIA covert actions, 
inclu ding the new authority to detainTen*orists^A a November 13, 2001, briefing for Committee 
staff, HHHHCTC Legal, HHHHIHH’ described the CIA’s new detention authorities 
as “terrifying” and expressed the CIA’s intent to “find a cadre of people who know how to run 
prisons, because we don’t.” 2446 Deputy Director of Operations (DDO) James Pavitt assured the 
Committee that it would be informed of each individual who entered CIA custody. Pavitt 
disavowed the use of torture against detainees while stating that the boundaries on the use of 
interrogation techniques were uncertain — specifically in the case of having to identify the 
location of a hidden nuclear weapon. 2447 

(l^IBH^NF) In meetings with the CIA in February 2002, the month before the 
capture and detention of Abu Zubaydah, Committee staff expressed co ncern about the lack of 
any legal review of the CIA’s new detention authorities. BHHH noted that the discussion 
with Committee staff was “the only peer review” the CIA lawyers had engaged in with regard to 
the MON authorities, and that the discussion helped refine the CIA’s understanding of what 
MON-authorized activity was in fact legally permissible and appropriate. 2448 

B. The CIA Notifies Committee of the Detention of Abu Zubaydah, but Makes No 
Reference to Coercive Interrogation Techniques; the CIA Briefs Chairman and Vice 
Chairman After the Use of the CIA’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques; the CIA 
Discusses Strategy to Avoid the Chairman’s Request for More Information 



On April 18, 2002, the CIA informed the Committee that it “has no 
current plans to develop a detention facility.” 2449 At the time of this representation, the CIA had 
already established a CIA detention site in Country | and detained Abu Zubaydah there. On 
April 24, 2002, the CIA notified the Committee about the capture of Abu Zubaydah with the 
understanding that the location of Abu Zubaydah’ s detention was among the “red lines” not to be 
divulged to the Committee. 2450 The notification and subsequent information provided to the 



2446 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence staff briefing, November 13, 2001 (DTS #2002-0629). 

2447 “\v e » re no t going to engage in torture. But, that said, how do I deal with somebody I know may know right now 
that there is a nuclear weapon somewhere in the United States that is going to be detonated tomorrow, and I’ve got 
the guy who I know built it and hid it? I don’t know the answer to that.” {See transcript of Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence MON briefing, November 7, 2001 (DTS #2002-0611); see also transcript of Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligenc^t^^riefing, December 11, 2001 (DTS #2002-0615). 

2448 Email from^^H^^H|||^|, SSCI Staff; to: Cleared SSC1 staff; subject: Meeting yesterday with CIA 

lawyers on ^ February 26, 2002 (DTS #2002-0925). 

2449 CIA responses to Questions for the ReconUhearing, March 6, 2002), April 18, 2002 (DTS #2002-1 800). 

2430 Email from: IBllHBR to: subject: Issues for SSCI and HPSCI biweekly update on CT; 

date: April 9, 2002; Transcript of “Update on War on Terrorism,” April 24, 2002 (DTS #2002-1993). Committee 
notifications of the capture of ‘Abd al-Rah im al-Nashiri likewise omitted referen ce to his location and the use of the 

1 1 ii 1 1 1 1 1 i' ' h i iii 

Page 437 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET // 



fl NOFORN 



Committee included representations that Abu Zubaydah was a “member of Bin Ladin’s inner 
circle” and a “key al-Qa’ida lieutenant.” 2451 These representations were inaccurate. Briefings to 
the Committee in the spring of 2002 emphasized the expertise of FBI and CIA interrogators 
engaged in the Abu Zubaydah interrogations and provided no indication that coercive techniques 
were being used or considered, or that there was significant disagreement between the CIA and 
the FBI on proposed interrogation approaches. 2452 In early August 2002, after the Department of 
Justice determined that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques on Abu Zubaydah 
would be legal, the CIA considered briefing the Committee on the CIA’s interrogation 
techniques, but did not. 2453 

early September 2002, the CIA briefed the House Permanent 
Select Committee on Intelligence (HP SCI) lead ership about the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. Two days after, the CIA’s ^^^|CTC Legal, excised from a 

draft memorandum memorializing the briefing indications that the HPSCI leadership questioned 
the legality of the program by deleting the sentence: “HPSCI attendees a lso questione d the 
legality of these techniques if other countries would use them.” 2454 After blind- 

copied Jose Rodriguez on the email in which he transmitted the changes to the memorandum, 
Rodriguez responded to email with: “short and sweet.” 2455 The first briefing for 

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairman Bob Graham and Vice Chairman Richard 
Shelby — and their staff directors — occurred on September 27, 2002, nearly two months after the 
CIA first began subjecting Abu Zubaydah to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The 
only record of the briefing is a one-paragraph CIA memorandum stating that the briefing 
occurred. 2456 The Committee does not have its own records of this briefing. 

Shortly thereafter, in late 2002, Chairman Graham sought to 
expand Committee oversight of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, including by 
having Committee staff visit CIA interrogation sites an d intervie w CIA inte rrogators. 2457 The 
CIA rejected this request. An internal CIA email from ^^^H^TC Legal 



CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. ( See Congressional Notification, November 20, 2002 (DTS #2002- 
4910).) On November |, 2002, the CIA notified the Committee of the death of Gul Rahman at a “detention facility 
in [Country ^|||] operated by the [Country | government] and funded by CIA.” This description, as well as 
subsequent representations to the Committee, understated the role of the CIA in managing DETEN TION SITE 
COBALT. See Congressional Notification, November 2002 (DTS #2002-5015); Responses to 
Counterterrorism Questions for the Record, Question 3 (DTS #2002-5059). 

2451 Congressional Notification, April 15, 2002 (DTS #2002-1710); CIA responses to Questions for the Record 
(hearing, March 6, 2002), April 1 8, 2002 (DTS #2002- 1 800). 

2452 x ranscr ipt G f “Update on War on Terrorism,” April 24, 2002 (DTS #2002-1993). 

2453 Email from: John Moseman; to: Stanley Moskowitz, et al.; subject: Abu Zubaydah Interrogation; date: August 3, 
2002, at 11:34: 13 AM. 

2454 Email from: to: bcc: Jose Rodriguez; subject: Re: immediate coord; 

date: September 6, 2002. See also ALE^^^^^^^^^07Z SEP 02). 

2455 Email from: Jose Rodriguez; to: HHIHHHH’ subject: Re: immediate coord; date: September 6, 2002, at 

2:52 PM. 

2456 DIRECTOR (25201 8Z OCT02) 



2457 Email from: Stanley Moskowitz; to: John Moseman, Scott Muller, James Pavitt; subject: Graham request for 
oversight into interrogation; date: December 4, 2002, at 05:58:06 PM; Stanley Moskowitz, Memorandum for the 
Record, February 4, 2003, “Subject: Sensitive Notification.” See also email from: Scott W. Muller; to: John A. 
Rizzo; cc: [REDACTED]; date: December 19, 2002. 

mi 1 1 iii i i mi him i 



Page 438 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



indicated that the full Committee would not be told about “the nature and scope of the 
interrogation process,” and that even the chairman and vice chairman would not be told in which 
country or “region” the CIA had established its detention facilities. 2458 Other emails describe 
efforts by the CIA to identify a “strategy” for limiting the CIA’s responses to Chairman 
Graham’s requests for more information on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 
specifically seeking a way to “get off the hook on the cheap.” 2459 The CIA eventually chose to 
delay its next update for the Committee leadership on the CIA’s program until after Graham had 
left the Committee. 2460 At the same time, the CIA rejected a request for the Committee staff to 
be “read-in” and provided with a briefing on the CIA program. 2461 

C. No Detailed Records Exist of CIA Briefings of Committee Leadership; the CIA Declines 
to Answer Questions from Committee Members or Provide Requested Materials 



On February 4, 2003, the CIA briefed the new chairman, Senator 
Pat Roberts, and the two staff directors. Vice Chairman John D. Rockefeller IV was not present. 
The only record of the briefing, a two-page CIA memorandum, states that CIA officers: 



“described in great detail the importance of the information provided by [Abu] 
Zubayda[h] and [‘Abd al-Rahim al-] Nashiri, both of whom had information of 
on-going terrorist operations, information that might well have saved 
American lives, the difficulty of getting that information from them, and the 
importance of the enhanced techniques in getting that information.” 2462 



As described in this summary, and in greater detail in the full Committee Study, Abu Zubaydah 
and al-Nashiri did not provide actionable intelligence on ongoing plotting, and provided 
significant reporting prior to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The CIA 
declined to provide information pursuant to a request from Chairman Roberts on the location of 
the CIA’s detention site. Finally, the CIA memorandum states that Chairman Roberts “gave his 
assent” to the destruction of interrogation videotapes; however, this account in the CIA 



2458 Email from: 



to: 



and 



|; subject: Sensitive Matters for 



the SSCI Quarterly CA Briefing; date: November 19, 2002. This email included the text of the CIA cables 
documenting the September 4, 2002, briefing to HPSCI leadership^See ALEC (101607Z SEP 02), and the 

September 27, 2002, briefing to SSCI leadership, DIRECTOR (25201 8Z OCT02). 

2459 Email from: Stanley Moskowitz; to: John Moseman, Scott Mueller, James Pavitt; subject: Graham request for 
oversight into interrogation; date: December 4, 2002, at 05:58:06 PM; email from: Stanley Moskowitz; to: John H. 
Moseman; cc: Scott Muller and James Pavitt; subject: [attached document] Re: Graham request on interrogations; 
date: December 9, 2002, at 05:46:1 1 PM. 

2460 Memorandum of December 26, 2002; FOR: Director of Central Intelligence; FROM: Scott W. Muller, General 
Counsel; SUBJECT: Disposition of Videotapes. 

2461 Memorandum to: Stanley Moskowitz; from: Steven A. Cash; subject: Briefing: Interrogation and Debriefing of 

individuals in custody related to counterterrorism operations, January 2, 2003 (DTS #2003-0266); Lotus Notes dated 
January 2 - Jan uary 3, between OCA, Q DDO, CTC personnel; email correspondences between [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], subject: “SSCI’s Request for Staff Briefing on Terrorism 

Interrogation/Debriefing Techniques.” 

2462 Moskowitz Memorandum for the Reco rd, February 4, 2003, “Subject: Sensi tive Notification.” 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi inn i 

Page 439 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



memorandum was later disputed by Chairman Roberts. 2463 The Committee has no independent 
record of this briefing. 



Throughout 2003, the CIA refused to answer questions from 
Committee members and staff about the CIA interrogations of KSM and other CIA detainees. 2464 
The CIA produced talking points for a September 4, 2003, briefing on the CIA interrogation 
program exclusively for Committee leadership; however, there are no contemporaneous records 
of the briefing taking place. The CIA talking points include information about the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, their effectiveness, and various abuses that occurred in 
the program. 2465 Many of the CIA representations in the talking points were inaccurate. 2466 The 
CIA continued to withhold from the Committee, including its leadership, any information on the 
location of the CIA’s detention facilities. On more than one occasion the CIA directed CIA 
personnel at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, not to brief a visiting Committee member about the CIA 
detention facility there, including during a July 2005 visit by Chairman Roberts. 2467 



In 2004, the Committee conducted two hearings on the CIA’s role 
in interrogating U.S. military detainees at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. CIA witnesses stressed that 
the CIA was more limited in its interrogation authorities than the Department of Defense, but 
declined to respond to Committee questions about the interrogation of KSM or press reports on 
CIA detention facilities. 2468 During the first briefing, on May 12, 2004, Committee members 
requested Department of Justice memoranda addressing the legality of CIA interrogations. 



2463 Moskowitz Memorandum for the Record, February 4, 2003, “Subject: Sensitive Notification.” For information 
on Senator Roberts’s objections, see “Destroying C.I.A. Tapes Wasn’t Opposed, Memos Say,” by Scott Shane, The 
New York Times, dated February 22, 2010. 

2464 Transcript of CIA briefing for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, March 5, 2003 (DTS #2003-1156); 

Transcript of “Intelligence Update,” April 30, 2003 (DTS #2003-2174); TranscriptofSe^ Committee on 

Intelligence briefing, September 3, 2003 (DTS #2004-0288); email from: to: [REDACTED]; 

subject: Re: EYES ONLY Re: Question Regarding Interrogations from SSCI Member Briefing on KSM Capture; 
date: March 17, 2003. 

2465 CIA Interrogation Program: DDO Talking Points, 04 September 2003. 

2466 For example, the talking points included inaccurate data on the waterboarding of Abu Zubaydah and KSM; 
stated that two unauthorized techniques were used with a detainee, whereas ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri was subjected 
to numerous unauthorized techniques; and inaccurately stated that the offending officers were removed from the 
site. The talking points also stated that the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques “has produced 
significant results,” and that the “[information acquired has saved countless lives....” See CIA Interrogation 
Program: DDO Talking Points, 04 September 2003. 

2467 Because the Committee was not informed of the CIA detention site at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, no member of 
the Committee was aware that the U.S. Supreme Court decision to grant certiorari in the case of Rasul v. Bush, 
which related to the habeas corpus rights of detainees at Guantanamo Bay, resulted in the transfer of CIA detainees 
from the CIA detention faci lity at Guantanamo Bay to other CIA detention facilities. See HEADQUARTERS 

subject “RESTRI CTED ACCESS T O [DETENTION S ITE COBALT] AND 
[DETENTION SITE ORANGE]”; email from: cc: Jose Rodriguez, 

[REDACTEDJ^^^HH, [RED ACTEDL^^^^MBniEDACTEDr [RE DACTE D] ; subject: 
guidance to Hfgitmo; date: May 14, 2004; forwarding final cable: HEADQUARTERS (141502Z MAY 
04), subject “Possible Briefto US Senator”; email from: Stanley Moskowitz; to: [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; 
subject: Re: guidance to ^|^itmo; date: May 14, 2004; CIA responses to Questions for the Rec ord, M arch 13, 
2008 (DTS #2008-1310); “CODEL Roberts to Miami/Guantanamo, 7-8 July 2005,” dated 5 July, ^jj| 902860. 

2468 Transcript of hearing. May 12, 2004 (DTS #2004-2332); Transcript of hearing, September 13, 2004 (DTS 



#2005-0750). 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



Page 440 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TGFSEGRET// 



//NOFQRN 



Despite repeated subsequent requests, limited access to the memoranda was not granted until 
four years later, in June 2008, by which time the CIA was no longer detaining individuals. 2469 

While the CIA continued to brief the Committee leadership on 
aspects of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, there are no transcripts of these 
briefi ngs. One br iefing, on July 1.5, 2004, discussed the detention of Janat Gul. 2470 An email 
from MHCTC Legal stated that the “only reason” the chairman and vice chairman were 
informed of the detention of Janat Gul was that the notification could serve as “the vehicle for 
briefing the committees on our need for renewed legal and policy support” for the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program. 2471 At the July 2004 briefing, the minority staff director 
requested full Committee briefings and expanded Committee oversight, including visits to CIA 
detention sites and interviews with interrogators — efforts that had been sought by former 
Chairman Graham years earlier. This request was denied. 2472 



D. Vice Chairman Rockefeller Seeks Committee Investigation 

(TS/^m^HB^/NE) On February 3, 2005, Vice Chairman Rockefeller began a formal 
effort to conduct a comprehensive Committee investigation of the CIA’s detention, interrogation 
and rendition activities, including a review of the legality and effectiveness of CIA 
interrogations. 2473 On March 3, 2005, a CIA official wrote that Vice Chairman Rockefeller was 
“convinced that we’re hiding stuff from him” and that the CIA had planned a detailed briefing to 
“shut Rockefeller up.” 2474 The only Committee records of this briefing, which took place on 
March 7, 2005, are handwritten notes written by Vice Chairman Rockefeller and the minority 
staff director. 2475 Shortly after this briefing, the vice chairman reiterated his call for a broad 
Committee investigation of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, which he and the 
ranking member of the HPSCI, Jane Harman, described in a letter to Vice President Cheney. 2476 
There is no Committee record of a response to the letter. 



2469 x ranscr ipt of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing, May 12, 2004 (DTS #2004-23 32)^Muhammad 
Rahim, the CIA’s la s t detainee, was transferred to U.S. military custody on Marchl3j2008^Sc^||^^H| 3445 

9754 8405 ^■■■^■[^^■8408 



2470 Handwritten notes of SSC1 Minority Staff Director Andrew Johnson (DTS #2009-2077); CIA notes (DTS 
#2009-2024, pp . 92-95); CIA not es (DTS #2009-2024, pp. 1 10-121). 

2471 Email from: to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Priority: congressional notification on Janat Gul; 

date: July 29, 2004. 

2472 Handwritten notes of SSCI Minority Staff Director Andrew Johnson (DTS #2009-2077); CIA notes (DTS 
#2009-2024, pp. 92-95); CIA notes (DTS #2009-2024, pp. 110-121). 

2473 February 3, 2005, letter from Senator Rockefeller to Senator Roberts on “the Committee’s upcoming agenda,” 
(letter incorrectly dated February 3, 2004). 

2474 Sametime message discussion between H|[|| and [REDACTED], March 3, 2005. 

2475 The notes indicate that CIA briefers provided inaccurate information. For example, the notes indicate that “[w]e 
screen carefully all people who might have contact with detainees” (emphasis in the Vice Chairman’s notes) and that 
“positive incentives” are used prior to “coercive measures.” In a reference to the waterboard, the notes state, the 
detainee “thinks he’s drowning, even though they are breathing.” See handwritten notes of then -Committee 
Minority Staff Director Andrew Johnson (DTS #2009-2077, Image 1) and handwritten notes of Senator Rockefeller. 

2476 Letter to Senator Roberts from minority SSCI members, March 10, 2005 (DTS #2005-1 126); Letter to Vice 
President Cheney from Vice Chairman Rockefeller and Representative Harman, March 11, 2005; Letter from 
Senator Rockefeller, March 11, 2005. 

m i 1 1 iii i mi m i 

Page 441 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ZNOFORN 



On April 13, 2005, the day before an anticipated Committee vote 
^Uh^dcechairaian’s proposed investigation of the CIA program, the chief of ALEC Station, 
and the deputy chief of CTC, Philip Mudd, discussed a press strategy to 
shape public and congressional views of the program. As previously detailed, Mudd wrote: 



“we either get out and sell, or we get hammered, which has implications 
beyond the media, congress reads it, cuts our authorities, messes up our 
budget, we need to make sure the impression of what we do is positive.” 2477 

The next day, CIA Inspector General John Helgerson briefed 
several members of the Committee on limited aspects of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Piogram. According to Helgerson, Chairman Roberts’ “motive was to have a presentation that 
made clear that CIA IG is looking at all appropriate detention and interrogation issues, as (he 
told me privately beforehand) the Committee will be voting today on whether to launch their 
own inquiry. Helgerson added that Roberts said *1 know how that vote is going to come out, 
but I want the minority to go away knowing this is in good hands.’” 2478 The proposed 
investigation was not approved by the Committee. The Committee nonetheless subsequently 
approved legislation requiring CIA reports on renditions and plans for the disposition of high- 
value CIA detainees, as well as requesting expanded Committee staff access to the program 
beyond the Committee staff directors. -479 In addition, Vice Chairman Rockefeller requested full 
Committee access to over 100 documents related to the May 2004 Inspector General Special 
Review. 2480 On January 5, 2006, after multiple rounds of negotiations with the CIA for the 
documents, the chief of staff to Director of National Intelligence Johi^Negroponte wrote a letter 
rdectin^he request. The letter had been prepared by the former Legal, HHI 

who was by then serving as a CIA detailee in the Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence. 2481 



|, April 13, 2005, from 19:23:50 to 
|; subject: this afternoon’s briefing; 



2477 Sametime communication, between John P. Mudd and H H 
19:56:05. 

2478 See email from: CIA Inspector General John Helgerson; to: __ 

date: April 13, 2005. There is no Committee transcript of the briefing. CIA records state that the briefing covered* 
“updates on the half dozen key abuse cases,” ghost detainees, and renditions. The notes do not reference the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. In response to a question from Vice Chainnan Rockefeller, Helgerson explained 
that the CIA was “preparing a comprehensive briefing” on detention and interrogation activities for the Committee. 

2479 Compartmented Classified Annex to Report No. S. 109-142, Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2006, as Reported by the Select Committee on Intelligence (DTS #2005-4028). 

2480 See Letter from Johi^^izzo to John Rockefelle^August 16, 2005 (DTS #2005-3522). The DNI, pursuant to 



the advice of former 



|CTC Legal, 



Committee access to the documents (email from: 



sorted the CIA’s proposed limitations on 
H; to: Michael Leiter; cc: David Shedd, 



l and others; subject: Review of Documents Requested by Senator Rockefeller; date: December 16, 

2005; Letter from David Shedd to Andy Johnson, January 5, 2006 (DTS #2006-0373)). 

!J!^Jterfrom David Shedd to Andy Johnson, Jan uary 5, 2006 (DT S #2006-0373); email from: 
t° : Michael Leiter; cc: David Shedd, 

Requested by Senator Rockefeller; date: December 16, 2005. 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 442 of 499 



| and others; subject: Review of Documents 

k/NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T 



//NOF O R N 



E. In Response to Detainee Treatment Act, the CIA Briefs Senators Not on the Committee; 
Proposal from Senator Levin for an Independent Commission Prompts Renewed Calls 
Within the CIA to Destroy Interrogation Videotapes 

In October and November 2005, after the Senate passed its version 
of the Detainee Treatment Act, the CIA, directed by the Office of the Vice President, briefed 
specific Republican senators, who were not on the Select Committee on Intelligence, on the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. (The full membership of the Committee had not yet 
been briefed on the CIA interrogation program.) 2482 The briefings, which were intended to 
influence conference negotiations, 2483 were provided to Senator McCain; 2484 Senators Ted 
Stevens and Thad Cochran, the chairmen of the Appropriations Committee and Defense 
Appropriations Subcommittee; 2485 Majority Leader Bill Frist; 2486 and Senator John Cornyn (CIA 
records state that Cornyn was not briefed on the CIA’s specific interrogation techniques). 2487 
Meanwhile, a proposal from Senator Carl Levin to establish an independent commission to 
investigate U.S. detention policies and allegations of detainee abuse resulted in concern at the 
CIA that such a commission would lead to the discovery of videotapes documenting CIA 
interrogations. That concern prompted renewed interest at the CIA to destroy the videotapes. 2488 



2482 According to an email from John Rizzo, the subject of one such meeting was “how the current version of 
McCain potentially undercuts our legal positiorC^Sccjimail from: John A. Rizzo; to: 



|; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



| [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: IMMEDIATE HEADS UP: VP Meeting with Appropriations Committee 
Leaders hip Tomo rrow re McCain Amendment; date: October 17, 2005, at 10:49:39 AM; email from: John Rizzo; to: 
■■■■I, cc: [REDACT EDl, [REDACTE D], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: IMMEDIATE: Re: Sen. Frist req for briefing on 
impact of McCain Amendment; date|Octobei^^2005^in0j53ri^AM. 



2483 Email from: John A. Rizzo; to: 



|; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: IMMEDIATE 
HEADS UP: VP Meeting with Appropriations Committee Leadership Tomorrow re McCain Amendment; date: 
October 17, 2005, at 10:49:39 AM. 



2484 Email from: John Rizzo; to: 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



l u ^ [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: IMMEDIATE: Re: 

Sen. Frist req for briefing on impact of McCain Amendment; date: October 31, 2005, at 10:53:16 AM; HH 
Talking Points for OVP Sponsored Meeting with Sen McCain; Impact of McCain Amendment on Legal Basis for 
CTC’s HVD Detention and Interrogation Program, 20 October 2005. 



2485 Email from: John Rizzo; to: 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: IMMEDIATE: Re: 



Sen. Frist req for briefing on imp^tofMcCaii^mendment; date: October 31, 2005, at 10:53:16 AM 



2486 Email from: John Rizzo; to 



; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



j7 I [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: IMMEDIATE: Re: 

Sen. Frist req for briefing on impact of McCain Amendment; date: October 31, 2005, at 10:53:16 AM; email from: 
John A. Rizzo; to: David R. Shedd; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: BRIEF READOUT: 31 OCT FRIST 
BRIEFING; date: November 1, 2005, at 2:53:40 PM. 



2487 Email from: John A. Rizzo; to: [REDACTED]; cc: 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



[REDACTED]; subject: Re: Senator Cornyn; date: November 30, 2005, at 12:50:1 1 PM. 

2488 On October 31, 2005, John Rizzo wrote an email stating that “Sen. Levin’s legislative proposal for a 9/1 1-type 
outside Commission to be established on detainee^eem^^^ainin^om^raction, which obviously would serve 

Mir m i ill' 

Page 443 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



flNQTORN 



Senator Levin’s amendment to establish the eommission failed on November 8, 2005. 2489 The 
CIA destroyed the CIA interrogation videotapes the following day. 2490 

F. CIA Director Goss Seeks Committee Support for the Program After the Detainee 
Treatment Act; CIA Declines to Answer Questions for the Record 



In March 2006, three months after passage of the Detainee 
Treatment Act, the CIA provided a briefing for five Committee staffers that included limited 



information on the interrogation process, as well as the effectiveness of the CIA interrogation 
program. 2491 The briefings did not include information on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques or the location of CIA detention sites. 2492 A week later, on March 15, 2006, CIA 
Director Porter Goss briefed the full Committee on CIA detention matters, but did not provide 
the locations of the CIA’s detention facilities, or a list or briefing on the CIA’s enhanced 



to surface the tapes existence. Rizzo then added that “I think 1 need to be the skunk at the party again and see if 
the Director is willing to let us try one more time to get the right people downtown on board with the notion of our 



[sic] destroying the tapes.” 



‘You are correct. The sooner we resolve this the better. 



|, a senior CIA attorney who had viewed the videotapes, responded, 



TTC Legal, | 



|, also agreed 



that ”[a]pproaching the DCIA is a good idea,” adding, ‘‘[c]ommissions tend to make very broad document 
pioduction demands, which might call for these videotape s that should have been destroyed in the normal course of 

/-I _ _ n aw53 i,— \-nii 



business^ years ago.” See email from: John A. Rizzo; to: 



; [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: principals wan^Rplantopublicly roll the CTC program 



in some fashion; date: October 31, 2005, at 10:37 AM; email from: 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 



|; to John A. Rizzo; cc: 

|; subject: Re: principals want PR plan to p ublicly 

to: John 



roll the CTC program in some fashion; date: October 31, 2005, at 12:32 PM; email from: 

A. Rizzo; cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: 

principals want PR platH^ubhcl^ll the CTC program in some fashion; date: October 31 , 2005, at 1 1 :45 AM. 
See also interview of by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, June 

17,2003. 

2489 See Senate Roll Call Vote #00309, November 8, 2005, 5:37pm, on Amendment #2430. 

2490 [REDACTED] 27089 (090627Z NOV 05) 

2491 A review of the Committee record of this briefing indicates much of the information provided by the CIA was 
inaccurate. For example, according to the Committee’s Memorandum for the Record, CIA briefers stated “the plan 
divorces questioning from coercive measures.” CIA records indicate, however, that questioning and the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were combined in practice. According to Committee records, CIA 
officials stated that Khalid al-Masri had and maintained connections to al-Qa’ida, and that he was released “when 
the CIA reached a point in debriefings that required [foreign government] assistance,” which was not forthcoming. 
The CIA Inspector General would later determine that when CIA officers questioned al-Masri, “they quickly 
concluded that he was not a terrorist,” and that there was “insufficient basis to render and detain al-Masri.” CIA 
officers referenced the captures of Hambali, Sajid Badat, Jose Padilla, and Iyman Faris, as well as the disruption of 
the West Coast/Second Wave plotting, the Heathrow Airport plotting, and the Karachi plotting. As detailed in this 
summary, the CIA consistently provided inaccurate representations regarding the plotting and the capture of the 
referenced individuals. CIA briefers also compared the program to U.S. military custody, stating that “the CIA can 
bring far more resources - debriefers, analysts, psychologists, etc. - per detainee than is possible at large scale 
facilities such as Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.” As described, the chief of Base at DETENTION SITE BLACK 
complained of “problem, underperforming” and “totally inexperienced” debriefers almost a year prior to this 
briefing. As further described, an inspector general audit completed three months after the briefing described the 
lack of debriefers at CIA detention facilities as “an ongoing problem.” (Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 
Memorandum for the Record, “CIA Briefing on Detention Program,” March 8, 2006 (DTS #2006- 1 1 82).) 

2492 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Memorandum for the Record, “CIA Briefing on Detention Program ” 
March 8, 2006 (DTS #2006-1 182). 

TOP 

Page 444 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET # 



//NOFORN 



interrogation techniques. 2493 At this hearing Director Goss explained to the Committee that “we 
cannot do it by ourselves,” and that “[w]e need to have the support of our oversight 
committee.” 2494 Goss then described challenges to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program as a result of the Detainee Treatment Act, as well as strained relations with countries 
hosting CIA detention sites after significant press revelations. 2495 Director Goss described the 
program as follows: 

“This program has brought us incredible information. It’s a program that could 
continue to bring us incredible information. It’s a program that could continue 
to operate in a very professional way. It’s a program that I think if you saw 
how it’s operated you would agree that you would be proud that it’s done right 
and well, with proper safeguards.” 2496 

Contrasting the CIA program to the abuse of prisoners in U.S. 
military detention at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, Director Goss stated that the CIA program: 

“is a professionally-operated program that we operate uniquely. . . . We are not 
talking military, and I’m not talking about anything that a contractor might 
have done. . . in a prison somewhere or beat somebody or hit somebody with a 
stick or something. That’s not what this is about.” 2497 

Addressing CIA interrogations, Director Goss testified that “we 
only bring in certain selected people that we think can give us intelligence information, and we 
treat them in certain specific ways” such that “they basically become psychologically 
disadvantaged to their interrogator.” Explaining that the key to a successful interrogation was 
“getting a better psychological profile and knowing what makes someone tick,” Director Goss 
stated, “just the simplest thing will work, a family photograph or something.” Goss then 
represented that the CIA’s interrogation program is “not a brutality. It’s more of an art or a 
science that is refined.” 2498 



2493 By the time of the briefing, press disclosures had resulted in widespread public discussion about some of the 
CIA’s reported enhanced interrogation techniques, including the waterboard. Goss was thus asked by a member of 
the Committee whether the CIA had undertaken a “technique by technique” analysis of the effectiveness of the 
program. Goss responded that the problem with such an analysis is that the techniques were used “in combination.” 
Asked by the member for a comparison of “waterboarding versus sleep deprivation,” Goss responded that 
“waterboarding is not used in conjunction with anything else.” As detailed elsewhere, this testimony was 
inaccurate. Goss then referred to sleep deprivation, dietary manipulation, and “environment control” as “alleged 
techniques.” See transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, March 15, 2006 (DTS #2006- 



1308). 

2494 Director Goss stated: “I’ve had to seriously consider whether passage of the McCain amendment was a 
congressional disapproval of the CIA use of EITs. I don’t think it was, and I don’t think that was the message you 
sent me. But I have to at least get that assurance, that that’s not what you were saying to me.” See transcript of 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, March 15, 2006 (DTS #2006-1308). 

2495 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, March 15, 2006 (DTS #2006-1308). 

2496 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, March 15, 2006 (DTS #2006-1308). 

2497 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, March 15, 2006 (DTS #2006-1308). 

2498 Transcript of Senate Select Committee oi^ntelligenc^riefing^tocl^5^006 (DTS #2006-1308). 

I Ml II ii |i i li il mi 1 1 

Page 445 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET / / 



//NOFORN 



After the hearing, the Committee submitted official Questions for 
the Record related to the history, legality, and the effectiveness of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. The CIA did not respond. 2499 



In May 2006, the Committee approved legislation requiring the 
CIA to provide reports on the CIA’s detention facilities (including their locations), the CIA’s 
interrogation techniques, the impact of the Detainee Treatment Act on the CIA program, CIA 
renditions, and the CIA’s plans for the disposition of its detainees. The legislation also called for 
full Committee access to the CIA May 2004 Inspector General Special Review, as well as 
expanded member and Committee staff access to information on the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. 2500 In July 2006, the new CIA director, General Michael Hayden, 
provided a briefing for the chairman and vice chairman in which he described the Detainee 
Treatment Act as a “safehaven” that potentially permitted the CIA to use its enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 2501 



G. Full Committee First Briefed on the CIA’s Interrogation Program Hours Before It Is 
Publicly Acknowledged on September 6, 2006 



On September 6, 2006, President Bush publicly acknowledged the 
CIA program and the transfer of 14 CIA detainees to U.S. military custody at Guantanamo Bay, 
Cuba. Hours prior to the announcement, CIA Director Hayden provided the first briefing on the 
CIA’s “enhanced interrogation” program for all members of the Committee, although the CIA 
limited staff attendance to the Committee’s two staff directors. 2502 Due to the impending public 
acknowledgment of the program, the briefing was abbreviated. At the briefing, the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques were listed, but not described. Director Hayden stated that the 
techniques were developed at the Department of Defense SERE school and were “used against 
American service personnel during their training.” He testified that “once [a detainee] gets into 
the situation of sustained cooperation,” debriefings are “not significantly different than what you 
and I are doing right now.” Hayden sought “legislative assistance” in interpreting Common 
Article 3, stated that he had not asked for an opinion from the Department of Justice, and 
represented that he had been informed informally that seven interrogation techniques “are 
viewed by the Department of Justice to be consistent with the requirements of the Detainee 
Treatment Act.” 2503 Director Hayden declined to identify the locations of the CIA’s detention 
facilities to the members and stated that he personally had recommended not expanding 



2499 Letter from Vice Chairman Rockefeller to Director Goss, containing Questions for the Record, May 10, 2006 
(DTS #2006-1949); Letter from Chairman Roberts to Director Goss, May 4, 2006 (DTS #2006-1876). 

2500 Classified Annex to Report No. S. 109-259, the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007 (DTS 
#2006-2208). Compartmented annex (DTS #2006-2209). 

2501 Hayden stated that Hcimdan v. Rumsfeld had effectively prohibited the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. He then described an “action” that would define Common Article 3 according to the Detainee 
Treatment Act, which was in turn “anchored” in the Convention Against Torture to “which the Senate expressed] 
reservation.” As described, two months later, the President sought Congressional approval of the Military 
Commissions Act. Based on handwritten notes by the Committee minority staff director. 

2502 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, September 6, 2006 (DTS #2007-1336). 

2503 As described above, the CIA had sought the Department of Justice’s opinion on the application of the Detainee 

Treatment Act to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The draft memorandum was withdrawn after the 
U.S. Supreme Court case in Hcimdan v. Ru msfeld. 

TOP 

Page 446 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//N O F O R N 



Committee staff access beyond the two staff directors already briefed on the CIA’s Detention 
and Interrogation Program. 2504 

There were no other Committee briefings or hearings on the CIA’s 
Detention and Interrogation Program prior to the Senate’s September 28, 2006, vote on the 
Military Commissions Act. As described, the Department of Justice later concluded that the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were consistent with the Military Commissions Act in 
part because, according to the CIA, “none of the Members [briefed on the CIA program] 
expressed the view that the CIA interrogation program should be stopped, or that the techniques 
at issue were inappropriate.” 2505 However, prior to the vote, Senator McCain — who had been 
briefed on the CIA program — told CIA officials that he could not support the program and that 
sleep deprivation, one of the interrogation techniques still included in the program, as well as 
waterboarding, were torture. 2506 Members of the Committee also expressed their views in 
classified letters to the CIA. Senator Dianne Feinstein informed the CIA that Hayden’s 
testimony on the CIA program was “extraordinarily problematic” and that she was “unable to 
understand why the CIA needs to maintain this program.” 2507 In May 2007, shortly after 
additional Committee staff gained access to the program, Senator Russ Feingold expressed his 
opposition to the program, while Senators Feinstein, Ron Wyden, and Chuck Hagel described 
their concerns about the CIA program and their “deep discomfort” with the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 2508 



O n November 16, 2006, CIA Director Hayden briefed the 
Committee. 2509 The briefing included inaccurate information, including on the CIA’s use of 
dietary manipulation and nudity, as well as the effects of sleep deprivation. 2510 Before speaking 



2504 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, September 6, 2006 (DTS #2007-1 336). The 
transcript includes the following exchange: Senator Feingold: “...you make it tougher on me and the members of 
the Committee by the decision to not allow staff access to a briefing like this. Was it your recommendation to deny 
staff access to this hearing?” CIA Director Hayden: “It was.” 

2505 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 

Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2506 Email from: cc: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTEDfii^^^^Kl^FDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Briefing for Senator John S. McCain (R-AZ); date: 
September 1 1, 2006, at 5:51 PM. 

2507 Letter from Senator Feinstein to Director Hayden, September 27, 2006 (DTS #2006-3717). 

2508 Letter from Senator Feingold to Director Hayden, May 1, 2007 (DTS #2007-1858); Letter from Senators 
Feinstein, Wyden and Hagel to Director Hayden, May 1 1, 2007 (DTS #2007-2102). 

2509 As in the September 6, 2006, briefing, only two staff members were permitted to attend. 

2510 Director Hayden testified that detainees were never provided fewer than 1,000 calories a day. This is inaccurate. 
There were no calorie requirements until May 2004, and draft OMS guidelines from March 2003 indicated that 
“[b]rief periods in which food is withheld (1-2 days), as an adjunct to interrogations are acceptable.” ( See OMS 
GUIDELINES ON MEDICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPORT TO DETAINEE RENDITION, 



INTERROGATION, AND DETENTION, May 17, 2004; OMS Guidelines on Medical and Psychological Support 
to Detainee Interrogations, First Draft, March 7, 2003.) Director Hayden testified that detainees were “not paraded 
[nude] in front of anyone,” whereas a CIA interrogator told the inspector general that nude detainees were “keptin a 
center area outside the interrogation room,’’andwereJ^walkedaround^^uards.” (See Interview Report, 

Page 447 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



about the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, however, Director Hayden asked to brief the 
Committee on the recent capture of the CIA’s newest detainee, Abdul Hadi al-Iraqi, who was not 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. Vice Chairman Rockefeller and two 
other members of the Committee expressed frustration at the briefing that Director Hayden’s 
description of Hadi al-Iraqi’s capture was preventing what was expected to be an in-depth 
discussion of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2511 

On February 14, 2007, during a hearing on CIA renditions, 

Director Hayden provided inaccurate information to the Committee, to includ e inaccurate 
inf ormation on th e number of detainees held by the CIA. the deputy chief of 

the ■■ Department in CTC and the previous deputy chief of ALEC Station, provided 
examples of information obtained from the CIA Detention and Interrogation Program. 2512 After 
providing the examples, closed her testimony with the statement that “[tjhere’s no 

question, in my mind, that having that detainee information has saved hundreds, conservatively 
speaking, of American lives.” 2513 

On March 15, 2007, in a speech to a gathering of ambassadors to 
the United States from the countries of the European Union, Director Hayden stated that 
congressional support for the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program assured the continuity 
of the program: 

“I mentioned earlier that it would be unwise to assume that there will be a 
dramatic change in the American approach to the war on terror in 2009. CIA 
got the legislation it needed to continue this program in the Military 
Commissions Act passed by our Congress last fall. And let me remind you 
that every member of our intelligence committees, House and Senate, 

Republican and Democrat, is now fully briefed on the detention and 
interrogation program. This is not CIA’s program. This is not the President’s 
program. This is America’s program.” 2514 



|, April 14, 2003.) B testified that standing sleep deprivation is discontinued when swelling 
or “any abnormality” appears. This was inaccurate. For example, KSM’s standing sleep deprivation continued, 
notwithsta nding pedal edema and abra sions on hi s ankles, shins and wrists, as well as the back of his head. (See 
■■■ 10916 (2 1 0845 Z MAR 03); 10909 (201918Z MAR 03).) Director Hayden testified that 

“mental conditions that would be of normal concern do not present themselves until a person has experienced more 
than 100 hours of sleep deprivation,” however at least thre e detainees experienced hall ucinations after being 
subiecte^^ew^har^6 hours ofsleepdepnvatiom 1393 (201006Z OCT 03); 

■^^■■■i^^^8122 04); ^HB 1312 
(^^HJAN04)[^^HH 1530^^^^B 3221 

2511 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing, November 16, 2006 (DTS #2007-1422). 

25,2 This testimony included inaccurate information. For example, B testified that KSM “identified sleeper 
cells inside the U.S., [and] the information allowed the FBI to identify that and take action.” She further testified 
that KSM “identified the second wave of attacks against the U.S. that were planned after 9/11,” that Abu Zubaydah 
“really pointed us towards [KSM] and how to find him,” and that Abu Zubaydah “led us to Ramzi bin al-Shibh.” 

See transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing, February 14, 2007 (DTS #2007-1337). 

Additional information on the testimony is included in the full Committee Study. 

2513 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing, February 14, 2007 (DTS #2007-1337). 

2514 DIRECTOR ■■ (152227Z MAR 07) 

mi 1 1 in i iiiii iiiiii 

Page 448 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



H. The CIA Provides Additional Information to the Full Committee and Staff, Much of It 
Inaccurate; Intelligence Authorization Act Passes Limiting CIA Interrogations to 
Techniques Authorized by the Army Field Manual 

On April 12, 2007, CIA Director Hayden testified at a lengthy 
hearing that was attended by all but one committee member, and for the first time, the CIA 
allowed most of the Committee’s staff to attend. The members stated that the Committee was 
still seeking access to CIA documents and information on the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program, including Department of Justice memoranda and the location of the CIA’s detention 
facilities. 2515 Director Hayden’s Statement for the Record included extensive inaccurate 
information with regard to Abu Zubaydah, CIA interrogators, abuses identified by the ICRC, and 
the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2516 Director Hayden’s 
Statement for the Record also listed five examples of captures and four examples of plots 
“thwarted” purportedly resulting from information acquired from CIA detainees, all of which 
included significant inaccurate information. 2517 Director Hayden’s Statement for the Record 
further included the following representation with regard to the effects of legislation that would 
limit interrogations to techniques authorized by the Army Field Manual: 

“The CIA program has proven to be effective. . . should our techniques be 
limited to the [Army] field manual, we are left with very little offense and are 
relegated to rely primarily on defense. Without the approval of EITs. . . we 
have severely restricted our attempts to obtain timely information from HVDs 
who possess information that will help us save lives and disrupt operations. 

Limiting our interrogation tools to those detailed in the [Army] field manual 



2515 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

2516 For example, the Statement for the Record claimed that Abu Zubaydah was “an up-and-coming lieutenant of 
Usama Bin Ladin (UBL) who had intimate knowledge of al-Qa’ida’s current operations, personnel and plans.” It 
also stated that “[a]fter die use of diese techniques, Abu Zubaydah became one of our most important sources of 
intelligence on al-Qa’ida, and he himself has stated that he would not have been responsive or told us all he did had 
he not gone through these techniques.” The Statement claimed that CIA interrogators were “carefully chosen and 
screened for demonstrated professional judgment and maturity,” and that “they must complete more than 250 hours 
of specialized training before diey are allowed to come face-to-face with a terrorist.” Claims made in the Statement 
refuting the abuses identified by die ICRC were repeated by Director Hayden during the hearing, and are described 
in an appendix to this summary. The Statement for the Record also included inaccurate information about past 
congressional oversight, claiming that “[a]s CIA’s efforts to implement [new interrogation] authorities got underway 
in 2002, the majority and minority leaders of die Senate, the speaker and the minority leader of die House, and die 
chairs and ranking members of the intelligence committees were fully briefed on die interrogation program.” See 
Witness Statement for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence from CIA Director Hayden, for April 12, 2007, 
hearing (DTS #2007-1563). 

2517 The Statement for die Record included claims of effectiveness similar to those made in odier contexts by die 
CIA, related to the captures of Hambali (on which Director Hayden elaborated during the hearing), Issa al-Hindi 
(“KSM also provided the first lead to an operative known as ‘Issa al-Hindi’”), Sajid Badat (“[l]eads provided by 
KSM in November 2003 led directly to the arrest of [Badat]”), Jose Padilla (“Abu Zubaydah provided information 
leading to the identification of alleged al-Qa’ida operative Jose Padilla”), and lyman Paris (“[s]oon after his arrest, 
KSM described an Ohio-based truck dri ver whom the FBI identified as lyman Paris, already under suspicion for his 
contacts with al-Qa’ida operative Majid Khan”). The statement also described the “thwarting” and “disrupting” of 
the “West Coast Airliner Plot” (aka, the Second Wave plotting), the “Heathrow Airport plot,” the “Karachi plots,” 
and “Plots in the Saudi Peninsula.” See Witness Statement for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence from 
CIA Director Hayden, for April 12, 2007, hearing_^DTS_^007-1^63^ 

m i 1 1 iii i i mi iiiii i 

Page 449 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



will increase the probability that a determined, resilient HVD will be able to 
withhold critical, time-sensitive, actionable intelligence that could prevent an 
imminent, catastrophic attack.” 2518 

(TS//|B^^^^^H^/NF) At the April 12, 2007, hearing, Director Hayden verbally provided 
extensive inaccurate information on, among other topics: (1) the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, 
(2) the application of Department of Defense survival school practices to the program, (3) 
detainees’ counterinterrogation training, (4) the backgrounds of CIA interrogators, (5) the role of 
other members of the interrogation teams, (6) the number of CIA detainees and their intelligence 
production, (7) the role of CIA detainee reporting in the captures of terrorist suspects, (8) the 
interrogation process, (9) the use of detainee reporting, (10) the purported relationship between 
Islam and the need to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, (11) threats against 
detainees’ families, (12) the punching and kicking of detainees, (13) detainee hygiene, (14) 

denial of medical care, (15) dietary manipulation, (16) the use of waterboarding and its 

effectiven ess, and (17) the injury and death of detainees. In addition, the chief of CTC’s BHH 
■I Department provided inaccurate information on the CIA’s use of stress positions, while 
Acting General Counsel John Rizzo provided inaccurate information on the legal reasons for 
establishing CIA detention facilities overseas. 2519 A detailed comparison of Director Hayden’s 
testimony and information in CIA records related to the program is included in an appendix to 
this summary. 

In responses to official Committee Questions for the Record, the 
CIA provided inaccurate information related to detainees transferred from U.S. military to CIA 
custody. 2520 The Committee also requested a timeline connecting intelligence reporting obtained 
from CIA detainees to the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. The CIA 
declined to provide such a timeline, writing that “[t]he value of each intelligence report stands 
alone, whether it is collected before, during, immediately after or significantly after the use of 
[the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques].” 2521 



2518 witness Statement for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence from CIA Director Hayden, for April 12, 
2007, hearing (DTS #2007-1563). 

25,9 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, April 12, 2007 (DTS #2007-3158). 

252° jj ie Committee had asked for specifics related to the assertion in Director Hayden’s written statement that the 
CIA program was effective in gaining intelligence after detainees successfully resisted interrogation under U.S. 
military detention. The CIA’s response referenced only one detainee, Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi, stating that he was 
“unwilling to become fully cooperative given the limitations of the U.S. military’s interrogation and detention 
regulations.” The CIA’s response to Committee questions then asserted that “[i]t was not until Abu Jaf’ar was 
subjected to EITS that he provided detailed information [about] his personal meetings with Abu Mus’ab al-Zarqawi 
and Zarqawi’s advisors,” and that “[i]n addition, Abu Jaf’ar provided information on al-Qa’ida in Iraq (AQI) 
finances, travel, and associated facilitation activities.” The provided information was inaccurate. CIA records 
indicate that, while still in U.S. military custody, Abu Ja’far described multiple meetings with al-Zarqawi, other 
members of al-Qa’ida in Iraq, and individuals who were to serve as al-Zarqawi’ s conn ection to sen ior al-Q a’ida 

al-Zaiqawi’s beliefs andplans. See |^^^^^32732 (HMfiS 
BHHHI 32726 (■■■ OCT 32810 

OCT 05). 

2521 CIA Response to Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Questions for the Record, June 18, 2007 (DTS 
#2007-2564). 



leadership 
OCT 05); 



Abu Ja’far also pr ovided in sights intc 

OCT 05); 




OCT 05); 



TOP SECRET// 



fl NOFORN 



Page 450 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRE T# 



t VNOFORN 



In May 2007, the Committee voted to approve the Fiscal Year 
2008 Intelligence Authorization bill, which required reporting on CIA compliance with the 
Detainee Treatment Act and Military Commissions Act. In September 2007, John Rizzo 
withdrew his nomination to be CIA general counsel amid Committee concerns related to his role 
in the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. On August 2, 2007, the Committee 
conducted a hearing that addressed the interrogation of Muhammad Rahim, who would be the 
CIA’s last detainee, as well as the president’s new Executive Order, which interpreted the 
Geneva Conventions in a manner to allow the CIA to use its enhanced in terrogation techniques 
against Muhammad Rahim. At that hearing, the CIA’s director of CTC, 
provided inaccurate information to the Committee on several issues, including how the CIA 
conducts interrogations. 2522 Members again requested access to the Department of Justice 
memoranda related to the CIA program, but were denied this access. 2523 

On December 5, 2007, the conference committee considering the 
Fiscal Year 2008 Intelligence Authorization bill voted to restrict the CIA’s interrogation 
techniques to those authorized by the Army Field Manual. Opponents of the provision 
referenced Director Hayden’s testimony on the effectiveness of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques in acquiring critical information. 2524 On December 6, 2007, the New York Times 
revealed that the CIA had destroyed videotapes of CIA interrogations in 2005. 2525 The CIA 
claimed that the Committee had been told about the destruction of the videotapes at a hearing in 
November 2006. 2526 A review of the Committee’s transcript of its November 16, 2006, hearing 
found that the CIA’s claim of notification was inaccurate. In fact, CIA witnesses testified at the 
hearing that the CIA did not videotape interrogations, while making no mention of past 
videotaping or the destruction of videotapes. 2527 



2522 



For example, the director of CTC, 



|, testified that detainees “are given ample opportunity to 



provide the information without the use of EITs” (Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, 
August 2, 2007 (DTS #2007-3641). As detailed in this Study, numerous detainees were subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques immediately upon being questioned. 

2523 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, August 2, 2007 (DTS #2007-3641). 

2524 Transcript, Committee of Conference on the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008, December 5, 
2007 (DTS #2009-1279). 

2525 “C.I.A. Destroyed Tapes of Interrogations,” The New York Times, December 6, 2007 (published in the 
December 7, 2007, edition of the newspaper). 

2526 Press Release, entitled, “Chairman Rockefeller Says Intel Committee Has Begun Investigation Into CIA 
Detainee Tapes; Senator Expresses Concern that CIA Continues to Withhold Key Information,” Office of Senator 
Rockefeller, December 7, 2007. 

2527 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence hearing, November 16, 2006 (DTS #2007-1422). The 
CIA’s June 2013 Response states only that “fw]e acknowledge that DCIA did not volunteer past information on 
CIA’s process of videotaping the interrogation sessions or of the destruction of the tapes....” The Committee review 
found that in testimony to the Committee in November 2006, CIA witnesses responded to questions about 
videotaping in terms of current practice, while avoiding any reference to past practice. This was similar to what was 
conveyed in June 2003, to David Addington of the Office of the Vice President, by CIA General Counsel Scott 
Muller. In June 2003, the CIA’s General Counsel Scott Muller traveled to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, with White 
House Counsel Alberto Gonzales, the Vice President’s counsel David Addington, Department of Defense General 
Counsel Jim Haynes, Patrick Philbin from the Department of Justice, and NSC Legal Advisor John Bellinger. 
According to CIA records, during the trip, White House officials asked CIA General Counsel Muller about the CIA 
Inspector General’s concerns regarding the waterboard technique and whether the CIA videotaped interrogations, as 
David Addington had heard tapes existed of the CIA’s interrogations of Abu Zubaydah. In an email to CIA 
colleagues providing details on the trip, M uller wrote: “(David Addington, by th e way, asked me if were [sic] 

TOP 

Page 451 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP - RE G RET// 



//NOF O RN 



At the CIA briefing to the Committee on December 11, 2007, 
Director Hayden testified about: (1) the information provided to the White House regarding the 
videotapes, (2) what the tapes revealed, (3) what was not on the tapes, (4) the reasons for their 
destruction, (5) the legal basis for the use of the waterboard, and (6) the effectiveness of the 
CIA’s waterboard interrogation technique. Much of this testimony was inaccurate or incomplete. 
Director Hayden also testified that what was on the destroyed videotapes was documented in 
CIA cables, and that the cables were “a more than adequate representation of the tapes.” 

Director Hayden committed the CIA to providing the Committee with access to the cables. 2528 

On February 5, 2008, after the House of Representatives passed the 
conference report limiting CIA interrogations to techniques authorized by the Army Field 
Manual, Director Hayden testified in an open Committee hearing against the provision. Director 
Hayden also stated, inaccurately, that over the life of the CIA program, the CIA had detained 
fewer than 100 people. 2529 On February 13, 2008, the Senate passed the conference report. 2530 

I. President Vetoes Legislation Based on Effectiveness Claims Provided by the CIA; CIA 
Declines to Answer Committee Questions for the Record About the CIA Interrogation 
Program 



O n March 8, 2008, President Bush vetoed the Intelligence 
Authorization bill. President Bush explained his decision to veto the bill in a radio broadcast that 
repeated CIA representations that the CIA interrogation program produced “critical intelligence” 
that prevented specific terrorist plots. As described in this summary, and in greater detail in 
Volume II, the statement reflected inaccurate information provided by the CIA to the president 
and other policymakers in CIA briefings. 2531 Three days later, the House of Representatives 



taping interrogations and said he had heard that there were tapes of the Zuba ydah interrogations. I tol d him th at 
tapes wer e not being made).” See email from: Scott Muller; to: John Rizzo, HPHHBUI, and 
mH; subject: Report from Gitmo trip (Not proofread as usual); date: June 2003, at 5:47 PM. 

2528 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, December 1 1 , 2007 (DTS #2007-4904). In the 
spring of 2008, after the Committee agreed on a bipartisan basis to continue investigating the destruction of the 
interrogation tapes, Chairman Rockefeller and Vice Chairman Bond pressed the CIA to provide the operational 
cables promised by Director Hayden. See April 21, 2008, letter from Chairman Rockefeller and Vice Chairman 
Bond, to Director Hayden (DTS #2008-1798). See also May 8, 2008, letter from Chairman Rockefeller and Vice 
Chairman Bond, to Director Hayden (DTS #2008-2030). 

2529 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, February 5, 2008 (DTS #2008-1140). 

2530 U.S. Senate vote to adopt the conference report on February 13, 2008, 4:31 PM. H.R. 2082 (Intelligence 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008). 

2531 The President’s veto message to the House of Representatives stated that “[tjhe CIA’s ability to conduct a 
separate and specialized interrogation program for terrorists who possess the most critical information in the war on 
terror has helped the United States prevent a number of attacks, including plots to fly passenger airplanes into the 
Library Tower in Los Angeles and into Heathrow Airport or buildings in downtown London” (Message to the House 
of Representatives, President George W. Bush, March 8, 2008). The president also explained his veto in his weekly 
radio address, in which he referenced the “Library Tower,” also known as the “Second Wave” plot, and the 
Heathrow Airport plot, while representing that the CIA program “helped us stop a plot to strike a U.S. Marine camp 
in Djibouti, a planned attack on the U.S. consulate in Karachi. . . .” (See President’s Radio Address, President George 
W. Bush, March 8, 2008). As detailed, CIA representations regarding the role of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques with regard to the Second Wav e, Heathrow Airport, Djibouti, and Ka rachi plots were inaccurate. 

TQRSEGRET/ZiMHltlll^^^A/NOEORN 

Page 452 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 




failed to override the veto. 2532 On May 22, 2008, the CIA informed the Committee that the 
vetoed legislation “has had no impact on CIA policies concerning the use of EITs.” 2533 As noted, 
CIA Director Goss had previously testified to the Committee that “we cannot do it by ourselves,” 
and that “[w]e need to have the support of our oversight committee.” 2534 As further noted, the 
OLC’s 2007 memorandum applying the Military Commissions Act to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques relied on the CIA’s representation that “none of the Members expressed 
the view that the CIA interrogation program should be stopped, or that the techniques at issue 
were inappropriate.” 2535 



) In June 2008, the CIA provided information to the Committee in 
response to a reporting requirement in the Fiscal Year 2008 Intelligence Authorization Act. The 
CIA response stated that all of the CIA’s interrogation techniques “were evaluated under the 
applicable U.S. law during the time of their use and were found by the Department of Justice to 
comply with those legal requirements.” This was inaccurate. Diapers, nudity, dietary 
manipulation, and water dousing were used extensively by the CIA prior to any Department of 



Justice review. As detailed in the full Committee Study, the response included additional 
information that was incongruent with the history of the program. 2536 




: ) On June 10, 2008, the Committee held a hearing on the 



Department of Justice memoranda relating to the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation ProgramJo 
which the Committee had recently been provided limited access. 2537 At the hearing, 

CTC Legal provided inaccurate information on several topics, including the use of sleep 



2532 U.S. House of Representatives Roll Call Vote 117 of the 1 10 lh Congress, Second Session, March 1 1, 2008, 7:01 
PM. 

2533 CIA Responses to Questions for the Record from the 6 March 2008 SSCI Covert Action Hearing, May 22, 2008 
(DTS #2008-2234). 

2534 Transcript of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence briefing, March 15, 2006 (DTS #2006-1308). 

2535 Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. 
Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: Application of 
the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions to Certain 
Techniques that May be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 14). 

2536 The CIA response stated that during sleep deprivation, the detainee is “typically... handcuffed in front of his 
body,” and “will not be permitted to hang from [the handcuffs],” despite the practice of detainees being subjected to 
the technique with their hands above their heads, and reports of detainees hanging from their wrists at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT. The response stated that “adult diapers and shorts [are] for sanitary purposes,” and 
that “caloric intake will always be at least 1 ,000 kcal/day,” although CIA records indicate that the purpose of the 
diapers in several cases was humiliation and there were no caloric requirements until May 2004. The response 
stated that “[n]o sexual abuse or threats of sexual abuse are permitted,” despite an insinuation that a family member 
of a detainee would be sexually abused. Tire response stated that “[t]he detainee may not be intentionally exposed to 
detention facility staff,” even though detainees at DETENTION SITE COBALT were walked around nude by 
guards. The response stated that during water dousing, water “cannot enter the detainee’s nose, mouth, or eyes,” but 
did not acknowledge detainees being immersed in water. Finally, the CIA response described limitations on the use 
of the waterboard that were exceeded in the case of KSM. (See Response to Congressionally Directed Actions cited 
in the Compartmented Annex to Report 110-75, June 16, 2008 (DTS #2008-2663).) This response was provided 
notwithstanding the presidential veto of this legislation on March 8, 2008. 

2537 The Committee had been provided four copies of the memoranda for a limited time. See Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, June 10, 2008 (DTS #2008-2698). 




Page 453 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



deprivation and its effects. 2538 Acting Assistant Attorney General Steven Bradbury also testified, 
noting that the Department of Justice deferred to the CIA with regard to the effectiveness of the 
CIA interrogation program. 2539 The Committee then submitted official Questions for the Record 
on the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and on the effectiveness of the program, 
including how the CIA assessed the effectiveness of its interrogation techniques for purposes of 
representations to the Department of Justice. 25 40 The CIA prepa red responses that included an 
acknowledgment that HIUCTC Legal, had provided inaccurate 

information with regard to the “effectiveness” of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 2541 The prepared responses were never provided to the Committee. Instead, on 
October 17, 2008, the CIA informed the Committee that it would not respond to the Committee’s 
Questions for the Record and that instead, the CIA was “available to provide additional briefings 
on this issue to Members as necessary.” 2542 In separate letters to Director Hayden, Chairman 
Rockefeller and Senator Feinstein referred to this refusal to respond to official Committee 
questions as “unprecedented and... simply unacceptable,” 2543 and “appalling.” 2544 



2538 



|CTC Legal repeated the representation that during sleep deprivation, detainees’ hands were 
shackled “about chin to chest level,” and stated that “[i]f there is any indicatio n, such as the legs begin to swell, or 
things of that nature, that may terminate the sleep deprivation.” HmCTC Legal also stated, inaccurately, 
that “we cannot begin to implement any of the measures, absent first attempting to get information from the 
individual in an up front and non-coercive way.” He added, also inaccurately, that “if the individual cooperates and 
begins to talk to you, you never go into the interrogation program.” 

2539 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, June 



10, 2008 (DTS #2008-2698). 

2540 Questions for the Record submitted to CIA Director Michael Hayden, September 8, 2008, with a request for a 
response by October 10, 2008 (DTS #2008-3522). 

2541 See CIA document prepared in response to “Questions for the Record” submitted by the Senate Select 

Committee on Intelligence on September 8, 2008. The Committee had inquired why information provided by Abu 
Zubaydah about Jose Padilla was included in the CIA’s “Effectiveness Memo” for the Department of Justice, given 
that Abu Zubaydah provided the information to FBI Special Agents prior to being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. The CIA response, preparedbutnever sent to the Committee, stated that the CTC attorney 
who prepared the CIA “Effectiveness Memo,” HfHHH, “simply inadvertently reported this wrong.” The 
unsent CIA response added that “Abu Zubaydahprovided information on Jose Padilla while being interrogated by 
the FBI,” and cited a specific CIA cable, 10991. In contrast to the CIA’s unsent response to Committee 

questions in 2008, the CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “[t]he Study also claims Abu Zubaydah had already 
provided [Jose Padilla’s] ‘Dirty Bomb’ plot information to FBI interrogators prior to undergoing CIA interrogation, 
but this is based on an undocumented FBI internal communication and an FBI officer’s recollection to the Senate 
Judiciary Committee seven years later.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response also represents that “[w]hile we have 
considerable information from FBI debriefings of Abu Zubaydah, we have no record that FBI debriefers acquired 
information about such an al-Qa’ida threat.” As detailed in this summary, this is inaccurate. The CIA’s June 2013 
Response further states that “CIA correctly represented Abu Zubaydah’ s description of Jose Padilla as an example 
of information provided after an individual had been subjected to enhanced interrogation techniques.” The CIA’s 
unsent response to Committee questions in 2008 acknowledged that “[djuring the initial timeframe Abu Zubaydah 
(AZ) was waterboarded the interrogation team believed that AZ was compliant and was not withholding actionable 
threat information,” but ALEC Station “had additional information they felt linked AZ with more planned attacks,” 
and that “[a]s a result, the interrogation team was instructed to continue with the waterboarding based on ALEC 
Station’s belief.” Finally, the unsent responses acknowledged that notwithstanding CIA representations to the 
Department of Justice regarding amenities available to CIA detainees, “[t]he amenities of today evolved over the 
first year and a half of the program,” and that Abu Zubaydah was not initially provided those amenities. 

2542 CIA Letter to Chairman John D. Rockefeller, IV, October 17, 2008 (DTS #2008-4131). 

2543 Letter from Chairman John D. Rockefeller, IV to CIA Director Michael Hayden, October 29, 2008 (DTS #2008- 



4217). 

2544 Letter from Senator Feinstein to CIA Directoi^ichaeHIayden 2008 (DTS #2008-4235). 

m i ii iii i i mi him i 



Page 454 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP-SE CRET// 



//NOFORN 



VII. CIA Destruction of Interrogation Videotapes Leads to Committee 

Investigation; Committee Votes 14-1 for Expansive Terms of Reference 
to Study the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 



The Committee’s scrutiny of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program continued through the remainder of 2008 and into the 1 1 1th Congress, in 2009. On 
February 11, 2009, the Committee held a business meeting at which Committee staff presented a 
memorandum on the content of the CIA operational cables detailing the interrogations of Abu 
Zubaydah and ‘ Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri in 2002. 2545 CIA Director Hayden had allowed a small 
number of Committee staff to review the cables at CIA Headquarters, and as noted, had testified 
that the cables provided “a more than adequate representation” of what was on the destroyed 
CIA interrogation videotapes. 2546 The chairman stated that the Committee staff memorandum 
represented “the most comprehensive statement on the treatment of these two detainees, from the 
conditions of their detention and the nature of their interrogations to the intelligence produced 
and the thoughts of CIA officers and contractors in the field and Headquarters.” 2547 After the 
staff presentation, the vice chairman expressed his support for an expanded Committee 
investigation, stating, “we need to compare what was briefed to us by the Agency with what we 
find out, and we need to determine whether it was within the guidelines of the OLC, the MON, 
and the guidelines published by the Agency.” 2548 Other members of the Committee added their 
support for an expanded investigation, with one member stating, “these are extraordinarily 
serious matters and we ought to get to the bottom of it. . . to look at how it came to be that these 
techniques were used, what the legal underpinnings of these techniques were all about, and 
finally what these techniques meant in terms of effectiveness.” 2549 



c ) The Committee held two subsequent business meetings to consider 
and debate the terms of the Committee’s proposed expanded review of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program. The first, on February 24, 2009, began with bipartisan support for a draft 
Terms of Reference. 2550 The Committee met again on March 5, 2009, to consider a revised 
Terms of Reference, which was approved by a vote of 14-1. 2551 



On December 13, 2012, after a review of more than six million 
pages of records, the Committee approved a 6,300-page Study of the CIA’s Detention and 



2545 See Committee business meeting records and transcript from February 11, 2009 (DTS #2009-1420). 

2546 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript of hearing, December 1 1 , 2007 (DTS #2007-4904). In the 
spring of 2008, after the Committee agreed on a bipartisan basis to continue investigating the destruction of the 
interrogation tapes, Chairman Rockefeller and Vice Chairman Bond pressed the CIA to provide the operational 
cables promised by Director Hayden. See letter from Chairman Rockefeller and Vice Chairman Bond, to Director 
Hayden, April 21, 2008 (DTS #2008-1798); letter from Chairman Rockefeller and Vice Chairman Bond, to Director 
Hayden, May 8, 2008 (DTS #2008-2030). 

2547 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript, business meeting, February 1 1 , 2009 (DTS #2009-1420) 

2548 Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript, business meeting, February 1 1 , 2009 (DTS #2009-1420) 

2549 Senator Ron Wyden (D-OR). Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Transcript, business meeting, February 



1 1 , 2009 (DTS #2009-1420). 

2550 Transcript, business meeting, February 24, 2009 (DTS #2009-1913) 

2551 Transcript, business meeting, March 5, 2009 (DTS #2009-1916) 

TOP - SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 455 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




UNCLASSIFIED 




Interrogation Program. 2552 On April 3, 2014, by a bipartisan vote of 11-3, the Committee agreed 
to send the revised findings and conclusions, and an updated Executive Summary of the 
Committee Study to the president for declassification and public release. 




2552 After the receipt of the CIA’s June 27, 2013, Response to the Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program, and subsequent meetings between the CIA and the Committee in the summer of 2013, the 
full Committee Study was updated. The final Committee Study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program 
exceeds 6,700 pages and includes approximately 38,000 footnotes. 




Page 456 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF O R N 



VIII. Appendix 1: Terms of Reference 



Terms of Reference 

Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Study of the 
Central Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program 

Adopted March 5, 2009 

The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence’s study of the Central Intelligence Agency’s (CIA) detention and 
interrogation program consists of these terms of reference: 

• A review of how the CIA created, operated, and maintained its detention and interrogation program, 
including a review of the locations of die facilities and any arrangements and agreements made by the CIA 
or other Intelligence Community officials with foreign entities in connection widi the program. 

• A review of Intelligence Community documents and records, including CIA operational cables, relating to 
the detention and interrogation of CIA detainees. 

• A review of the CIA’s assessments that particular detainees possessed relevant information and how the 
assessments were made. 

• An evaluation of the information acquired from the detainees including die periods during which enhanced 
interrogation techniques (EITs) were administered. 

• An evaluation of whether information provided to the Committee by the Intelligence Community 
adequately and accurately described die CIA’s detention and interrogation program as it was carried out in 
practice, including conditions of detention, such as personal hygiene and medical needs, and their effect on 
the EITs as applied. 

• An evaluation of the information provided by the CIA to die Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel 
(OLC), including whether it accurately and adequately described: 

a. the implementation, effectiveness and expected effects of EITs; 

b. the value of information obtained through the use of EITs; and 

c. the threat environment at die time the EITs were being used or contemplated for use on CIA 
detainees. 

• An evaluation of whether the CIA’s detention and interrogation program complied with: 

a. the authorizations in any relevant Presidential Findings and Memoranda of Notification; 

b. all relevant policy and legal guidance provided by the CIA; and 

c. the opinions issued by the OLC in relation to the use of EITs. 

• A review of the information provided by the CIA or other Intelligence Community officials involved in the 
program about the CIA detention and interrogation program, including the location of facilities and 
approved interrogation techniques, to U.S. officials with national security responsibilities. 

The Committee will use those tools of oversight necessary to complete a thorough review including, but not limited 
to, document reviews and requests, interviews, testimony at closed and open heal ings, as appropriate, and 
preparation of findings and recommendations. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 457 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 



IX. Appendix 2: CIA Detainees from 2002 - 2008 




CIA Detainees 



Abu Zubaydah 



Zakariya 



Jamal Eldin Boudraa 



Abbar al-Hawari, aka Abu Sufiyan 



Hassan Muhammad Abu Bakr Qa’id 



Ridha Ahmad Najar, aka Najjar 



AyubMarshid Ali Salih 



8 Bashir Nasir Ali al-Marwalah 



Ha’il Aziz Ahmad al-Milhali 



10 Hassan bin Altash 



1 1 Musab Umar Ali al-Mudwani 



12 Said Saleh Said, aka Said Salih Said 



13 Shawqi Awad 



14 Umar Faruq, aka Abu al-Faruq al-Kuwaiti 



15 Abd al-Salam al-Hilah 



16 Karim, aka Asai Sar Jan 



1 7 Akbar Zakaria, aka Zakaria Zeineddin 



18 Rafiq bin Bashir bin Halul al-Ilami 



1 9 Tawfiq Nasir Awad al Bihani 



20 Lutfi al-Arabi al-Gharisi 



2 / Dr. Hikmat Nafi Shaukat 



22 Yaqub al-Baluchi aka Abu Talha 



23 Abd al-Rahim Ghulam Rabbani 



24 Gul Rahman 



25 Ghulam Rabbani aka Abu Badr 



26 Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri 



27 tlaji Chalgi 



28 Nazar Ali 



29 Junta Gul 



30 Wafti bin Ali aka Abdullah 



31 Adel 



32 Qari Moltib Ur Rehman 



33 Shah Wali Khan 



34 I Hayatullah Haqqani 



35 Bishcr al-Rawi 



36 Jamil el-Banna, aka Abu Anas 



Days in CIA 
Custody 




Bold Text: Detainees in bold text were 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 

Italics Text: Detainees in italics have not 
been previously acknowledged by the CIA 
to the SSCI. 

#: Detainee number on main detainee 
spreadsheet; based on date of CIA custody. 
Number is based on a designation made by 
the Committee, not the CIA. 

Note on Redaction: The last digit of days 
in CIA custody is redacted. 



SOURCE INFORMATION 

CIA Fax to SSCI Committee Staff, 
entitled, “15 June Request for Excel 
Spreadsheet,” June 17, 2009. DTS #2009- 
2529. 

CIA detainee charts provided to the 
Committee on April 27, 2007. Document 
in Committee Records entitled, “Briefing 
Charts provided to committee members 
from CIA Director Michael Hayden at the 
closed Hearing on April 12, 2007, 
concerning EITs used with CIA detainees, 
and a list of techniques.” DTS #2007- 
1594. 

CIA operational cables and other records 
produced for the Committee’s Study of the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program. 



Page 458 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












































































































































# 



CIA Detainees 



Date of 
Custody 



Days in CIA 
Custody 



37 


Ghairat Bahir 


^■^■■2002 


51| 




38 


Pacha Wazlr 


■ M 


33| 


KEY 

Bold Text: Detainees in bold text were 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 

Italics Text : Detainees in italics have not 
been previously acknowledged by the CIA 
to the SSCI. 

#: Detainee number on main detainee 
spreadsheet; based on date of CIA custody. 
Number is based on a designation made by 
the SSCI, not the CIA. 

SOURCE INFORMATION 

CIA Fax to SSCI Committee Staff, 
entitled, “15 June Request for Excel 
Spreadsheet,” June 17, 2009. DTS #2009- 
2529. 

CIA detainee charts provided to the 
Committee on April 27, 2007. Document 
in Committee Records entitled, “Briefing 
Charts provided to committee members 
from CIA Director Michael Hayden at the 
closed Hearing on April 12, 2007, 
concerning EITs used with CIA detainees, 
and a list of techniques.” DTS #2007- 
1594. 

CIA operational cables and other records 
produced for the Committee’s Study of the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program. 


39 


Muhammad Amein al-Bakri 


■■12003 


49| 


40 


Abdullah Midhat Mursi 


m 

0 

0 

1 


Hi 


41 


Ramzi bin al-Shibli 


■■■>003 


128| 


42 


Ibn Shaykh al-Libi 


^^^■>003 


114| 


43 


Muhammad Umar ‘Abd al-Rahman, aka 
Asadallah 


■■■2003 


15| 


44 


Abu Khalid 


■■■2003 


1 


45 


Khalid Shaykh Mohammad 


^^■2003 


126| 


46 


Mustafa Ahmad al-IIawsawi 


■■^003 


126| 


47 


Abu Yasir al-Jaza’iri 


§■■^003 


124| 


48 


Suleiman Abdullah 


■^■2003 


43| 


49 


Hamid Aich 


■■^003 


4 


50 


Sayed Habib 


^^■2003 


49| 


51 


Abu Hazim, aka Abu Hazim al-Libi 


^1^12003 


72| 


52 


Al-Shara’iya, aka Abd al-Karim 


^^■2003 


48| 


53 


Muhammad Khan (son of Suhbat) 


■■12003 


38| 


54 


Ibrahim Haqqani 


1 

O 

O 


1 


55 


Ammar al-Baluchi 


■H2003 


J18| 


56 


Khaliad bin Attash 


^^■2003 


118| 


57 


Laid Ben Dohnian Saidi, aka Abu Iludhaifa 


■■2003 


46| 


58 


Majid Khan 


^^■2003 


118| 


59 


Mohammad Dinshah 


■^003 


26| 


60 


Muhammad Jafar Jamal al-Qahtani 


^^12003 


34| 


61 


Abu Nasim al-Tunisi 


■■2003 


32| 


62 


Mohd Farik bin Amin, aka Abu Zubair 


{■■2003 


1 15| 


63 


Zarmein 


1^^12003 


19| 


64 


Hiwa Abdul Rahman Rashul 


■■2003 


Hi 


65 


Adel Abu Redwan Ben Hamlili 


■■§2003 


30| 


66 


Shaistah Habibullah Khan 


■^■2003 


2l| 


67 


Samr Hilmi Abdul Latif al-Barq 


■■{2003 


1 


68 


Ali Jan 


!■■■■, 2003 


34| 


69 


Muhammad Klian (son of Amir) 


■[■■2003 


1 


70 


Modin Nik Muhammad 


^■^■2003 


20| 


71 


Abdullah Ashami 


■■■2003 


27| 


72 


Bashir bin Lap, aka Lillie 


■■■12003 


ik| 


73 


Riduan bin Isomuddin, aka Iiambali 


■■■2003 


128| 



















































































































































UNCLASSIFIED 



CIA Detainees 



Days in CIA 
Custody 



74 


Sanad ‘Ali Yislam al-Kazimi 


75 


Salah Nasir Salim Ali, aka Muhsin 


76 


Abd Qudra Allah Mala Azrat al-Hadi 


77 


Bismullah 


78 


Sa’id Allam 


79 


Sa’ida Gul 


80 


Shall Khan Wali 


81 


Yahya, aka Rugollah 


82 


Zakariya ‘abd al-Rauf 


83 


Zamarai Nur Muhammad Juma Khan 


84 


Abdullah Salim al-Qahtani 


85 


Awwad Sabhan al-Sliannnari 


86 


Noor Jalal 


87 


Majid Bin Muhammad Bin Sulayman 
Khayil, aka Arsala Khan 


88 


Aso Hawleri 


89 


Mohd al-Shomaila 


90 


Ali Saeed Awadh 


91 


Adnan al-Libi 


92 


Muhammad Abdullah Saleh 


93 


Riyadh the Facilitator 


94 


Abu Abdallah al-Zulaytini 


95 


Binyam Ahmed Mohamcd 


96 


Firas al- Yemeni 


98 


Khalid ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Masri 


97 


Hassan Ghul 


99 


Muhammad Qurban Sayyid Ibrahim 


100 


Saud Memon 


101 


Gill Rahman (2) 


102 


Hassan Ahmed Guleed 


103 


Abu ‘Abdallah 


104 


ABU BAHAR AL-TURKI 


105 


ABU TALHA AL-MAGREBI 


106 


Abd al-Bari al-Filistini 


107 


Ayyub al-Libi 


108 


Marwan al-Jabbur 



[REDACTED] 

2004 



[REDACTED] 

2004 



Bold Text: Detainees in bold text were 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 

holies Text: Detainees in italics have not 
been previously acknowledged by the CIA 
to the SSCI. 

#: Detainee number on main detainee 
spreadsheet; based on date of CIA custody. 
Number is based on a designation made by 
the SSCI, not the CIA. 




Approximately 

I3| 



Approximately 

13 | 



109 Qattal al-Uzbeki 




SOURCE INFORMATION 

CIA Fax to SSCI Committee Staff, 
entitled, “15 June Request for Excel 
Spreadsheet,” June 17, 2009. DTS #2009- 
2529. 

CIA detainee charts provided to die 
Committee on April 27, 2007. Document 
in Committee Records entitled, “Briefing 
Charts provided to committee members 
from CIA Director Michael Hayden at the 
closed Hearing on April 12, 2007, 
concerning ElTs used with CIA detainees, 
and a list of techniques.” DTS #2007- 
1594. 

CIA operational cables and other records 
produced for die Committee’s Study of the 
CIA’s Detention and Interrogation 
Program. 




UNCLASSIFIED 
















































































































































UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFGRN 



# 


CIA Detainees 


Date of 
Custody 


Days in CIA 
Custody 




110 


Jannt Gul 


■^|2004 


92| 




111 


Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani 


BH20D4 


73| 


KEY 


112 


Sharif al-Masri 


^■^^■2004 


8l| 




113 


Abdi Rashid Samatar 


■■■■■2004 


65| 


subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 


114 


Abu Far^j al-Libi 


■■2005 


46| 


Italics Text: Detainees in italics have not 
been previously acknowledged by the CIA 


115 


Abu Munlhir al-Magrcbi 


1 

o 

o 

Cn 


44 


116 


Ibrahim Jan 


■ ■ 


31| 


to the SSCI. 


117 


Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi 


i m 


24 


#: Detainee number on main detainee 
spreadsheet; based on date of CIA custody. 
Number is based on a designation made by 


118 


Abd al-Hadi al-Iraqi 


^■■B 2006 


17| 


119 


Muhammad Rahim 


■■2007 


24 





Sources: CIA Fax to SSCI Committee Staff, entitled, “15 June Request for Excel Spreadsheet,” June 17, 2009 
(DTS #2009-2529); CIA detainee charts provided to the Committee on April 27, 2007; document in Committee 
records entitled, “Briefing Charts provided to committee Members from CIA Director Michael Hayden at the closed 
Hearing on April 12, 2007, concerning EITs used with CIA detainees, and a list of techniques” (DTS #2007-1594, 
hearing transcript at DTS# 2007-3158); and CIA operational cables and other records produced for the Committee’s 
Study of the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program. 

** Gul Rahman, listed as detainee 24, was the subject of a notification to the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence following his death at DETENTION SITE COBALT; however, he has not appeared on lists of CIA 
detainees provided to Committee. 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 461 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











































UNCLASSIFIED 




X. Appendix 3: Example of Inaccurate CIA Testimony to the Committee- 
April 12, 2007 

Testimony of Michael V. Hayden, Director, Central Intelligence Agency 
to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, April 12, 2007 2553 



CIA Testimony Sampling of Information 

in CIA Records 



The Interrogation of Abu Zubaydah 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “Now Abu Zubaydah was rendered to CIA custody on March^f” 
in June, after about four months 2002. The CIA representation that Abu Zubaydah stopped 
of interrogation, Abu Zubaydah cooperating with debriefers who were using traditional 
reached a point where he refused interrogation techniques is not supported by CIA records. 
to cooperate and he shut down. In early June 2002, Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogators 
He would not talk at all to the recommended that Abu Zubaydah spend several weeks in 
FBI interrogators and although he isolation from interrogation while the interrogation team 
was still talking to CIA members traveled “as a means of keeping [Abu 

interrogators no significant Zubaydah] off-balance and to allow the team ne eded time 

progress was being made in off fo r a break and to attend to personal matters 

learning anything of intelligence as well as to discuss “the endgame” for Abu 

value. He was, to our eye, Zubaydah HHH with officers from CIA Headquarters, 

employing classic resistance to As a result, Abu Zubaydah spent much of June 2002 and 

interrogation techniques and all of July 2002, 47 days in total, in isolation. When CIA 

employing them quite effectively, officers next interrogated Abu Zubaydah, they 
And it was clear to us that we immediately used the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 

were unlikely to be able to techniques, including the waterboard. 

overcome those techniques 

without some significant Prior to the 47 day isolation period, Abu Zubaydah 

intervention.” provided information on al-Qa’ida activities, plans, 

capabilities, and relationships, in addition to information 

2553 Transcript at DTS #2007-3158. The CIA’s June 2013 Response states: “We disagree with the Study's 
conclusion that the Agency actively impeded Congressional oversight of the CIA Detention and Interrogation 
Program. ...As discussed in our response to Conclusion 9, we also disagree with the assessment that the information 
CIA provided on the effectiveness of the program was largely inaccurate. Finally, we have reviewed DCIA 
Hayden’s testimony before SSCI on 12 April, 2007 and do not find, as the Study claims, that he misrepresented 
virtually all aspects of the program, although a few aspects were in error.... The testimony contained some 
inaccuracies, and the Agency should have done better in preparing the Director, particularly concerning events that 
occurred prior to his tenure. However, there is no evidence that there was any intent on the part of the Agency or 
Director Hayden to misrepresent material facts.” The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that the CIA has “identified 
a number of broad lessons learned” and includes eight recommendations. The CIA’s only recommendation related 
to Congress was: “Recommendation 8: Improve recordkeeping for interactions with Congress. Direct the Director of 
the Office of Congressional Affairs (OCA) and the Chief Information Officer to develop a concrete plan to improve 
recordkeeping on CIA’s interactions with Congress. OCA’s records going forward should reflect each interaction 
with Congress and the content of that interaction. OCA should work with the oversight committees to develop 
better access to transcripts of CIA testimony and briefings. This plan should be completed within 90 days of the 
arrival of a new Director of OCA.” 



ir« 'vra* >] hi ir/, 

> 'I ■'! 'I »» »»» ITH~f ~f 1 



Page 462 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 




DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “This 
really began in the spring of 2002 
with the capture of Abu 
Zubaydah. At that time we 
deployed a psychologist who had 
been under contract to CIA [Dr. 
SWIGERT], to provide real-time 
recommendations to help us 
overcome what seemed to he Abu 
Zubaydah ’s very strong 
resistance to interrogation.. . We 
also made arrangements for [Dr. 
DUNB AR], [D r. DUNBAR] 
was the JUpsychologist for 
the Department of Defense’s 
SERE program, DOD’s Survival, 
Escape, Recovery and Evasion 
program, the program of training 
we put our troops, particularly 
our airmen, through so that they 
can withstand a hostile 
environment.” 



on its leadership structure, including personalities, 
decision-making processes, training, and tactics. Abu 
Zubaydah provided this type of information prior to, 
during, and after the utilization of the CIA’s enhanced 
inteiTogation techniques. 2554 

Abu Zubaydah’ s inability to provide information on the 
next attack in the United States and operatives in the 
United States was the basis for CIA representations that 
Abu Zubaydah was “uncooperative,” and for the CIA’s 
determination that Abu Zubaydah required the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques to become 
“compliant” and reveal the information the CIA believed 
he was withholding. At no point during or after the use of 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques did Abu 
Zubaydah provide the information sought. 2555 



The CIA testimony that SWIGERT was deployed to 
“overcome what seemed to be Abu Zubaydah’ s very 
strong resistance to interrogation” is not supported by 
internal CIA records. Rather, CIA records indicate that 
CIA CTC officers anticipated Abu Zubaydah would resist 
providing information and contracted with SWIGERT 
prior to any meaningful assessment of Abu Zubaydah and 
his level of cooperation. 

• On April 1, 200 2, at a me eting on th e interro gation of 
Ab^Zubaydah, |^^|C I C Legal HHi 

recommended that SWIGERT — who was 
working under contract in the CIA’s OTS — be brought 
in to “provide real-time recommendations to overcome 
Abu Zubaydah ’s resistance to interroga tion.” (A bu 
Zubaydah had been in CIA custody for HH-) That 
evening, SWIGERT, and the CIA O^^fficer who 
had recommended SWIGERT to HIHH1’ 
prepared a cable with suggestions for the interrogation 
of Abu Zubaydah. SWIGERT had monitored the U.S. 
Air Force’s Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape 
(SERE) training. SWIGERT, who had never 
conducted an actual interrogation, encouraged the CIA 



2554 See intelligence reporting charts in Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume 111, as well as a CIA paper 
entitled, “Abu Zubaydah,” dated March 2005. Similar information was included in, “Abu Zubaydah Bio,” a CIA 
document “Prepared on 9 August 2006.” 

2555 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III. 



Page 463 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 




to focus on developing “learned helplessness” in CIA 
detainees. 2556 

• Following the suggestion of |^||^HCTC Legal, 
CTC contracted with SWIGERT to assist in the 
interrogation of Abu Zubaydah. 

• As described in the Abu Zubaydah detainee review in 

Volume III, almost immediately after Abu Zubaydah’ s 
transfer to CIA custody on March 2002, Abu 
Zubaydah’ s medical condition deteriorated and Abu 
Zubaydahwastransferred to the intensive care unit of 
a hospital in Country |. During this 

time, FBI personnel continued to collect significant 
intelligence from Abu Zubaydah. According to an FBI 
report, during the period when Abu Zubaydah was still 
“connected to the intubator” at the hospital and unable 
to speak, he “indicated that he was willing to answer 
questions of the interviewers via writing in Arabic.” 
While in the intensive care unit of the hospital, Abu 
Zubaydah first discussed “Mukhtar” (KSM) and 
identified a photograph of KSM. 

• WhenAbu Zubaydah was discharged from the HH| 
Kdd hospital and returned to the CIA’s 
DETENTION SITE GREEN on April 15, 2002, he 
was kept naked, sleep deprived, and in a cell with 
bright lights with white noise or loud music playing. 
The FBI personnel objected to the coercive aspects of 
Abu Zubaydah’ s interrogation at this time, as they 
believed they were making substantial progress 
building rapport with Abu Zubaydah and developing 
intelligence without these measures. (During their 
questioning of Abu Zubaydah, the FBI officers 
provided a towel for Abu Zubaydah to cover himself 
and continued to use rapport building techniques with 
the detainee. 2557 ) 



2556 See Volume I, including 178955 (012236Z APR 02); April 1, 2002 email from [REDACT ED] to 

[REDACTED], re: Please coord on cable attached; and email from [REDACTED] to [REDACTED], cc: 
mm, April 1, 2002, re: POC for [SWIGERT]- consultant who drafted Al-Qa’ida resistance to interrogation 
backgrounder (noting that CTC/LGL would contact SWIGERT). 

2557 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volu me III. 



Page 464 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “We The representation that the “requirement to be in the CIA 

wanted [SWIGERT’s and detention program is knowledge of [an] attack against the 

DUNBAR’s] ideas about what United States or its interests or knowledge about the 

approaches might be useful to get location of Usama bin Ladin or Ayman al-Zawahiri” is 

information from people like Abu inconsistent with how the CIA’s Detention and 

Zubaydah and other Interrogation Program operated from its inception. 2558 As 

uncooperative al-Qa ’ida detailed elsewhere, numerous individuals had been 

detainees that we judged were detained and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 

withholding time-sensitive, interrogation techniques, despite doubts and questions 

perishable intelligence. Keep in surrounding their knowledge of terrorist threats and the 

mind, as a backdrop for all of location of senior al-Qa’ ida leadership. 

this, this wasn’t interrogating a 

snuffy that’s picked up on the 

battlefield. The requirement to 

be in the CIA detention program 

is knowledge of [an] attack 

against the United States or its 

interests or knowledge about the 

location of Usama bin Ladin or 

Ayman al-Zawahiri . ” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “We The representation that Abu Zubaydah “would not talk” is 
began in 2002, in the spring of incongruent with CIA interrogation records. The CIA 

2002. We had one very high representation that the CIA “knew [Abu Zubaydah] knew 

value detainee, Abu Zubaydah. a lot” reflected an inaccurate assessment of Abu Zubaydah 

We knew he knew a lot. He from 2002, prior to his capture, and did not represent the 

would not talk. We were going CIA’s assessment of Abu Zubaydah as of the April 2007 
nowhere with him. The decision testimony, 
was made, we’ve got to do 

something. We’ve got to have an • Prior to Abu Zubaydah’ s capture, the CIA had 
intervention here. What is it we intelligence stating that Abu Zubaydah was the “third 

can do?” or fourth” highest ranking al-Qa’ida leader. This 

information was based on single-source reporting that 
was retracted in July 2002 — prior to Abu Zubaydah 
being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. Other intelligence in CIA databases 
indicated that Abu Zubaydah was not a senior member 
of al-Qa’ida, but assisted al-Qa’ida members in 
acquiring false passports and other travel documents. 
Still other reporting indicated that, while Abu 
Zubaydah served as an administrator at terrorist 
training camps, he was not the central figure at these 
camps. 







• After Abu Zubaydah was subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques in August 2002, the 
chief of Base at DETENTION SITE GREEN wrote: 

“I do not believe that AZ was as wired with al-Qa’ida 
as we believed him to be prior to his capture.” 2559 

• In August 2006, the CIA published an assessment that 
concluded that “misconceptions” about Afghanistan 
training camps with which Abu Zubaydah was 
associated had resulted in reporting that “miscast Abu 
Zubaydah as a ‘senior al-Qa’ida lieutenant.’” The 
assessment concluded that “al-Qa’ida rejected Abu 
Zubaydah’s request in 1993 to join the group.” 2560 

CIA representations that interrogators “were going 
nowhere with [Abu Zubaydah]” prior to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques are also 
incongruent with CIA records. 

• Prior the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, Abu Zubaydah provided information on al- 
Qa’ida activities, plans, capabilities, relationships, 
leadership structure, personalities, decision-making 
processes, training, and tactics. Abu Zubaydah 
provided this type of information prior to, during, and 
after the utilization of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 

• A quantitative review of Abu Zubaydah’s 
disseminated intelligence reporting indicates that more 
intelligence reports were disseminated from Abu 
Zubaydah’s first two months of interrogation — prior to 
the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques — than were derived during the two-month 
period during and after the use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques. 2561 



2559 Email from: [REDACTED] (outgoing Chief of Base at DETENTION SITE GREEN): to: [REDACTED] 
subject: “Assessment to Date” of AZ; date: 10/06/2002, at 05:36:46 AM. 

2560 CIA Intelligence Assessment, August 16, 2006, “Countering Misconceptions About Training Camps in 
Afghanistan, 1990-2001.” 

2561 See Abu Zubaydah detainee review in Volume III, including monthly intellig ence reporting charts. 

TOP 

Page 466 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







CIA ’s Enhanced Interrogation Techniques and the SERE School 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “After The CIA consistently represented that the CIA’s enhanced 

lengthy discussion, [Dr. interrogation techniques were the same as the techniques 

SWIGERT] suggested that we used in the U.S. Department of Defense SERE school, 
might use the interrogation However, CIA interrogation records indicate there were 

approaches that had been, for significant differences in how the techniques were used 

years, safely used at the DOD against CIA detainees. For example, a letter from the 

survival school — in other words, assistant attorney general to the CIA general counsel 
the interrogation techniques that highlighted the statement in the Inspector General Special 
we were training our airmen to Review that the use of the waterboard in SERE training 
resist. Those techniques have was “so different from subsequent Agency usage as to 

been used for about 50 years, make it almost irrelevant.” 2562 Prior to the use of the 

with no significant injuries.” CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Abu 

VICE CHAIRMAN BOND: Zubaydah, the chief of Base at the detention site identified 

“And the techniques you are differences between how the SERE techniques were 

using are boiled down, is it true, applied in training, and how they would be applied to Abu 

from the SERE school?” Zubaydah: 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “All of 

them are techniques that have “while the techniques described in Headquarters 

been used in the SERE school, meetings and below are administered to student 

that’s right, Senator.” volunteers in the U.S. in a harmless way, with no 

measurable impact on the psyche of the volunteer, 
we do not believe we can assure the same here for a 
man forced through these processes and who will be 
made to believe this is the future course of the 
remainder of his life. . . personnel will make every 
effort possible to insure [sic] that subject is not 
permanently physically or mental harmed but we 
should not say at the outset of this process that there 

is no risk.” 2563 

Department of Justice Approval 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “This As described in this summary, the August 1, 2002, 
list of recommended techniques Department of Justice OLC memorandum relied on 
then went to the Department of inaccurate information provided by the CIA concerning 
Justice for their opinion Abu Zubaydah’ s position in al-Qa’ida and the 

regarding whether or not the interrogation team’s assessment of whether Abu Zubaydah 



2562 Letter from Assistant Attorney General Goldsmith to CIA General Counsel Scott Muller, May 27, 2004. For 
more information on the SERE program, see the Senate Armed Services Committee Inquiry into the Treatment of 
Detainees in U.S. Custody, December 2008. See also statement of Senator Carl Levin relating to the inquiry, 
December 1 1, 2008: “In SERE school, our troops who are at risk of capture are exposed in a controlled 
environment with great protections and caution - to techniques adapted from abusive tactics used against American 
soldiers by enemies such as the Communist Chinese during the Korean War. SERE training techniques include 
stress positions, forced nudity, use of fear, sleep deprivation and, until recently, the Navy SERE school used the 
waterboard. These techniques were designed to give our students a taste of what they might be subjected to if 
captured by a ruthless, lawless enemy so that they would be better prepared to resist. The techniques were never 
intended to be used against detainees in U.S. custody.” 

2563 [REDACTED] 73208 (231043Z JUL 02) 

mi 1 1 iii i ||||< ii'imiii 

Page 467 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









techniques were lawful. DOJ 
returned a legal opinion that the 
13 techniques were lawful, didn’t 
constitute torture, and hence 
could be employed for CIA 
i nterrogations . ” 2564 



VICE CHAIRMAN BOND: 
“How far down the line [does al- 
Qa’ida] train [its] operatives for 
interrogation resistance?” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “I’m 
getting a nod from the 
experts, 2566 Senator, that it’s 
rather broadly-based.” 

VICE CHAIRMAN BOND: “So 
even if you captured the al- 
Qa’ida facilitator, probably the 
army field manual stuff are 
things that he’s already been 
trained on and he knows that he 
doesn’t have to talk.” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “We 
would expect that, yes. Senator.” 



was withholding information about planned terrorist 
attacks. 

The OLC memorandum, which stated that it was based on 
CIA-provided facts and would not apply if facts were to 
change, was also specific to Abu Zubaydah. The CIA 
nonetheless used the OLC memorandum as the legal basis 
for applying its enhanced interrogation techniques against 
other CIA detainees. 2565 



Resistance Trainin 



A review of CIA records on this topic identified no 
records to indicate that al-Qa’ida had conducted “broadly- 
based” interrogation resistance training. The CIA 
repeatedly represented that Abu Zubaydah “wrote al 
Qaeda’s manual on resistance techniques.” 2567 This 
representation is also not supported by CIA records. 

When asked about interrogation resistance training, Abu 
Zubaydah stated: 

“... both Khaldan camp and Faruq [terrorist 
training] camp at least periodically included 
instruction in how to manage captivity. He 
explained that in one instance, Khaldan had an 
Egyptian who had collected and studied 
information from a variety of sources 
(including manuals and people who had been 
in ‘different armies’). This Egyptian ‘talked 
to the brothers about being strong’ and ‘not 
talking.’ Abu Zubaydah’ s response to this 



2564 The August 1, 2002, OLC memorandum addressed 10 interrogation techniques. The May 10, 2005, OLC 
memorandum addressed 13 techniques. 

2565 “Our advice is based upon the following facts, which you have provided to us. We also understand that you do 

not have any facts in your possession contrary to the facts outlined here, and this opinion is limited to these facts. If 
these facts were to change, this advice would not necessarily apply.” ( See Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting 
General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 1).) CIA records indicate that 
it was not until July 29, 2003, that the Attorney General stated that the legal principles of the August 1, 2002, 
memorandum could be applied to other CIA detainees. {See June 1 8, 2004, letter from Assistant Attorney General 
Jacl^^joldsmith IIH^Directo^eneODTS #2004-2710).) In a subsequent interview with the OIG, however, 
I^ICTC Legal, stated that “every detainee interrog ated is differe nt in that they are outside 

the opinion because the opinion was written for Zubayd ah.” The context for statement was the 

legality of the waterboarding of KSM. See Interview of by [REDACTED], [REDACTED], and 

[REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, August 20, 2003. 

“^OtherCIA attend ees at the hearing included John Rizzo, and 

Wmm, former HHjCTC Legal, attended for the ODNI. 

2567 Memorandum for John Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Jay Bybee, Assistant 
Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, August 1, 2002, Interrogation of al Qaeda Operative (DTS #2009-1810, 
Tab 1). 



Page 468 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 





was to take him aside — out of the view of the 
brothers — and explain to him that it was more 
important to have a ‘super plan— not expect a 
superman.’” 2568 

Abu Zubaydah explained that he informed trainees at the 
training camp that “‘no brother’ should be expected to 
hold out for an extended time,” and that captured 
individuals will provide information in detention. For that 
reason, the captured individuals, he explained, should 
“expect that the organization will make adjustments to 
protect people and plans when someone with knowledge is 
captured.” 2569 


CIA Interrogators , U.S. Military Interrogators , and the Army Field Manual 


DIRECTOR HAYDEN; “All 
those involved in the questioning 
of detainees have been carefully 
chosen and carefully 
screened , 2570 The average age of 


This CIA testimony is incongruent with internal CIA 
records and the operational history of the program. 

• On November 2002, after the completion of the 

first formal interrogation training class, BHUBBBI 


our officers interrogating 
detainees is 43. Once they are 
selected, they must complete 
more than 250 hours of 
specialized training for this 
program before they are allowed 
to come face-to-face with a 


CT^Legal^^^^^^BI^B’ asked CTC attorney 
“[m]ake it known that from now 
on, CTC/LGL must vet all personnel who are enrolled 
in, observing or teaching - or otherwise associated 
with - the class.” 2572 The chief of CTC, Jose 
Rodriguez, objected to this approach, stating: “I do 
not think that CTC/LGL should or would want to get 



2568 



m 10496 (162014Z FEB 03). On July 25, 2002, a CIA Headquarters cable stated that Abu Zubaydah 
was the “author of a seminal al-Qa’ida manual on resistance to interrogation techniques.” ( See DIRECTOR HU 
(251609Z JUL 02)). As a result of an ACLU lawsuit, in April 2010, the CIA released a document stating that Abu 
Zubaydah was the “author of a seminal al-Qa’ida manual on resistance to interrogation techniques.” ( See ACLU 
release entitled, “CIA Interrogation of AZ Released 04-15-10.”) No CIA records could be identified to support this 
CIA assessment. 

2569 

2570 



WSKBM 10496 G62014Z FEB 03) 

The CIA’s June 2013 Response states that “[w]e concede that prior to promulgation of DC1 guidance on 
interrogation in January 2003 and the establishment of interrogator training courses in November of the same year, 
not every CIA employee who debriefed detainees had been thoroughly screened or had received formal training. 
After that time, however - the period with which DCIA Hayden, who came to the Agency in 2005, was most 
familiar - the statement is accurate.” CIA records indicate that the first interrogator training course was established 
in November 2002. General Hayden became the CIA Director on May 30, 2006. After this time two CIA detainees 
entered CIA cus tody, one of whom w as subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 

2572 Email from: JHHH^H^HJ^CTC/LGL; to: [REDACTED]; cc: Jose Rodriguez, [REDACTED], 
[REDACTED], ^|H^H||[m;subject: EYES ONLY; date: November 2002, at 03:13:01 PM. As 
described above, Gul RahmarGikel^roze to death at DETENTION SITE COBALT sometime in the morning of 
November 2002. email, however, appears to have been drafted before the guards had 

found Gul Rahman’s body and before that death was reported to CIA Headquarters. See [REDACTED] 3021 1 

describing the guards observing Gul Rahman alive in the morning of November 2002. Gul 



Rahman’s death appeared in cable traff ic at least 
to provide the impetus for 




TOP SECRET/, 



’s email. No records could be identified 



/NOFOR N 



Page 469 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NO PORN 



terrorist. And wc require 
additional field work under the 
direct supervision of an 
experienced officer before a new 
interrogator can direct an 
interrogation.” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “The 
Army field manual was also 
written to guide the conduct of a 
much larger, much younger force 
that trains primarily to detain 
large numbers of enemy 
prisoners of war. That’s not what 
the CIA program is.” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “[The 
Army Field Manual has] got to 
be done by hundreds and 
hundreds of teenagers in 
battlefield tactical situations.” 
SENATOR JOHN WARNER: 
“Without the benefit of a tenth of 
the training of your 
professionals.” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: 
“Exactly.” 2571 



into the business of vetting participants, observers, 
instructors or others that arc involved in this program. 
It is simply not your job. Your job is to tell all what 
are the acceptable legal standards for conducting 
interrogations per the authorities obtained from Justice 
and agreed upon by the White House.” 2573 Contrary to 
CIA Director Hayden’s comments and Statement for 
the Record that “|a]ll those involved in the questioning 
of detainees are carefully chosen and screened for 
demonstrated professional judgment and maturity,” 
CIA records suggest that the vetting sought by 
| did not take place. The Committee 
reviewed CIA records related to several CIA officers 
and contractors involved in the CIA’s Detention and 
Interrogation Program, most of whom conducted 
interrogations. The Committee identified a number of 
personnel whose backgrounds include notable 
derogatory information calling into question their 
eligibility for employment, their access to classified 
information, and their participation in CIA 
interrogation activities. In nearly all cases, the 
derogatory information was known to the CIA prior to 
the assignment of the CIA officers to the Detention 
and Interrogation Program. This group of officers 
included individuals who, among other issues, had 
engaged in inappropriate detainee interrogations, had 
workplace anger management issues, and had 
reportedly admitted to sexual assault. 2574 

Director Hayden’s testimony on the required hours of 
training for CIA interrogators is inconsistent with the 
early operational history of the program. Records 
indicate that CIA officers and contractors who 
conducted CIA interrogations in 2002 did not undergo 
any interrogation training. The first interrogator 
training course, held in November 2002, required 
approximately 65 hours of classroom and operational 



In addition, IHIHIHHI’ Former Chief, CTC, testified: “First off, we have 

thirteen interrogators and, of that thirteen, eleven are contract employees of ours, and they’ve all been through the 
screening process, they’ve all been through our vetting process, and they are certainly more than qualified. They are 
probably some of the most mature a nd professional peop le you will have in this business.” 

2571 Email from: Jose Rodriguez; HCTC/LGL; cc: [REDACTED!, [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED!, | REDACTED|, EYES ONLY; date: November |, 2002, at 04:27 

PM. 

2574 For additional detailed information, se e Volume 111. 

TOP SECRET// 

Page 470 of 499 



7NOFORN 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOF Q R N 





G3m 


Other Members of the Interrogation Team 


DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “All 
interrogation sessions in which 
one of these lawful procedures is 
authorized for use has to be 
observed by nonparticipants to 
ensure the procedures are applied 
appropriately and safely. Any 
observer can call ‘ knock it off at 
any time. They are authorized to 
terminate an interrogation 
immediately should they believe 
anything unauthorized is 
occurring.” 

SENATOR SNOWE: “So you 
also mentioned that there are 
non-participants who are 
observing the interrogation 
process. Who are these non- 
participants?” 


This testimony is incongruent with CIA records, for 
example: 

• During the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, CIA 
personnel at DETENTION SITE GREEN objected to 
the continued use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques against Abu Zubaydah, stating that it was 
“highly unlikely” Abu Zubaydah possessed the threat 
information CIA Headquarters was seeking. 2578 When 
the interrogation team made this assessment, they 
stated that the pressures being applied to Abu 
Zubaydah approached “the legal limit.” 2579 CIA 
Headquarters directed the interrogation team to 
continue to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques and instructed the team to refrain from 
using “speculative language as to the legality of given 
activities” in CIA cables. 2580 



2575 December 4, 2002 Training Report, High Value Target Interrogation and Exploitation (HVTIE) Training 
Seminar 12-18 Nov 02, (pilotrunmng). 

2576 DIRECTOR APR 03) 

2577 Interrogator Selection, Training, Qualification, and Certification Process; approximately January 29-February 4, 



2003. ____ 

2578 See 10604 (091624Z AUG 02) and 10607 (100335Z AUG 02). In an email, the former 

SERE psychologists on contract with the CIA, who largely devised the CIA enhanced interrogation techniques, 
wrote that Abu Zubaydah stated he was “ready to talk” the first day after they used the CIA’s techniques. Speaking 
specifically of the waterboard technique, they wrote, “As for our buddy; he capitulated the first time. We chose to 
expose him over and over until we had a high degree of confidence he wouldn’t hold back. He said he was ready to 
talk during the first exposure.” See email from: [REDACTED]; subject: “Re: [SW1GERT and DUNBAR]”; date: 
Au gust 21, 200 2, at 10:21 PM. 

2579j|^gg 1060 7 (100335Z AUG 02) 

2580 Email from: Jose Rodriguez; to: [REDACTED]; subject: “[DETENTION SITE GREEN],” with attachment of 
an earlier email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; date: August 12, 2002. See also the section on Abu 
Zubaydah’ s interrogation in this summary andth^bi^ubayda^ in Volume III. 

mi iii iii i i (> i |( | i |N 

Page 471 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 





UNCLASSIFIED 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “They 
could be other interrogators, 
medical personnel, chief of base, 
debriefers, analysts.” 

SENATOR SNOWE: “Do they 
ever raise concerns during this 
process, during these 
interrogations?” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: 
“Everybody watching has - every 
individual has an absolute right 
to stop the procedure just by 
saying ‘stop.’” 

SENATOR SNOWE: “Did it 
happen? It’s never happened?” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “No, 
we’re not aware. I’m sor ry. 

John [Riz zo] and [BMU 
HH] point out it’s just not 
the ability to stop it; it is an 
obligation to stop it if they 
believe something is happening 
that is unauthorized.” 



During the KSM interrogation sessions, the CIA chief 
of Base directed that the medical officer at the 
detention site not directly contact CIA Headquarters 
via the CIA’s classified internal email system, to avoid 
establishing “grounds for further legal action.” 

Instead, the chief of Base stated that any information 
on KSM’s interrogations would be first reviewed by 
the chief of Base before being released to CIA 
Headquarters. 2581 Prior to KSM’s third waterboard 
session of March 13, 2003, the on-site medical officer 
raised concerns that the session would exceed the 
limits of draft OMS guidelines for the waterboard. 2582 
The waterboard session was conducted after an 
approval email from a CTC attorney at CIA 
Headquarters. 2583 The medical officer would later 
write that “[tjhings are slowly evolving form [sic] 
[medical officers] being viewed as the institutional 
conscience and the limiting factor to the ones who are 
dedicated to maximizing the benefit in a safe manner 
and keeping everyone’s butt out of trouble.” 2584 

As was the case with several other CIA detainees, 

‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri was repeatedly subjected to 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques at the 
direction of CIA Headquarters, despite opposition 
from CIA interrogators. 2585 



• The CIA Inspector General Special Review states that 
CIA “psychologists objected to the use of on-site 



I ' klrJ it ikB U llBrJ: 



; subject: EYES ONLY - Use of Water Board; date: March 13, 

2003, at 08:28 AM. 

25 84 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: cc: subject: Re: State cable; date: 

March 13, 2003, at 1 :43: 17 PM. The previous day, the medical officer had written that “I am going the extra mi le to 
tr^tHiandl^hisr in a non confrontational manner.” See email from: [REDACTED]; to: cc; 

HHBH; subject: Re: MEDICAL SITREP 3/10; date: March 12, 2003, at 5:17:07 AM. 

2585 See, for example, the report of investigation of the Inspector General: “By mid-2002, Headquarters and 
[DETENTION SITE BLUE] were at odds regarding [DETENTION SITE BLUEfs assessment on Al-Nashiri and 
how to proceed with his interrogation or debriefing. On several occasions throughout December 2002, 
[DETENTION SITE BLUE] reported via cables and secure telephone calls that Al-Nashiri was not actively resisting 
and was responding to questions directly. Headquarters disagreed with [DETENTION SITE BLUEfs assessment 
because Headquarters analysts thought Al-Nashiri was withholding imminent threat information.” See Report of 
Investigation, Office of the Inspector General, Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques at [DETENTION SITE 
BLUE] (2003-7 123-IG), 29 October 2003, p. 18 (DTS #2003-4897). 



Page 472 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












UNCLASSIFIED 




SENATOR SNOWE: “Did any 
CIA personnel express 
reservations about being engaged 
in the interrogation or these 
techniques that were used?” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “I’m 
not aware of any. These guys are 
more experienced. No.” 



psychologists as interrogators and raised conflict of 
interest and ethical concerns.” According to the 
Special Review, this was “based on a concern that the 
on-site psychologists who were administering the 
[CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques] participated 
in the evaluations, assessing the effectiveness and 
impact of the [CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques] on the detainees.” 2586 In January 2003, 
CIA Headquarters required that at least one other 
psychologist be present who was not physically 
participating in the administration of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. According to H 
■HOMS, however, the problem still existed 
because “psychologist/interrogators continue to 
perform both functions.” 2587 



This statement is incongruent with CIA records. For 
example, from August 4, 2002, through August 23, 2002, 
the CIA subjected Abu Zubaydah to its enhanced 
interrogation techniques on a near 24-hour-per-day basis. 
The non-stop use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques was disturbing to CIA personnel at 
DETENTION SITE GREEN. These CIA personnel 
objected to the continued use of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah, but were 
instructed by CIA Headquarters to continue using the 
techniques. The interrogation using the CIA’s enhanced 
techniques continued more than two weeks after CIA 
personnel on site questioned the legality “of escalating or 
even maintaining the pressure” on Abu Zubaydah. CIA 
records include the following reactions of CIA personnel 
expressing “reservations about being engaged in the 
interrogations” and the use of the techniques: 



August 5, 2002: “want to caution [medical 
officer] that this is almost certainly not a place 
he’s ever been before in his medical career. . . It is 
visually and psychologically very 
uncomfortable.” 2588 



2586 Special Review, Office of the Inspector General, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities 
(September 2001 - October 2003) (2003-7 123-IG), 7 May 2004, p. 35 (DTS #2004-2710). 

2587 Special Review, Office of the Inspector General, Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities 
(September 200 1 - October 2003) ( 2003-7 123-IG), 7 May 2004, p. 40 (DTS #2004-27 10). 

2588 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Re: Monday; date: August 5, 2002, 

at 05:35 AM. 



Page 473 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








• August 8, 2002: “Today’s first session... had a 
profound effect on all staff members present. . . it 
seems the collective opinion that we should not go 
much further.. . everyone seems strong for now 
but if the group has to continue. . . we cannot 
guarantee how much longer.” 2589 

• August 8, 2002: “Several on the team profoundly 
affected. . . some to the point of tears and choking 
up.” 2590 

• August 9, 2002: “two, perhaps three [personnel] 
likely to elect transfer” away from the detention 
site if the decision is made to continue with the 
enhanced interrogation techniques. 2591 

• August 11, 2002: Viewing the pressures on Abu 
Zubaydah on video “has produced strong feelings 
of futility (and legality) of escalating or even 
maintaining the pressure.” With respect to 
viewing the interrogation tapes, “prepare for 
something not seen previously.” 2592 

The chief of CTC, Jose Rodriguez — via email — instructed 
the CIA interrogation team to not use “speculative 
language as to the legality of given activities” in CIA 
cable traffic. 2593 Shortly thereafter, circa December 2002, 
the CIA general counsel had a “real concern” about the 
lack of details in cables of what was taking place at CIA 
detention sites, noting that “cable traffic reporting was 
becoming thinner,” and that “the agency cannot monitor 
the situation if it is not documented in cable traffic.” 2594 
The CIA’s chief of interrogations — who provided training 
to CIA interrogators — expressed his view that there was 



2589 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Update; date: 

August 8, 2002, at 06:50 AM. 

2590 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], ■■■■ |, [REDACTED]; subject: Update; date: 
August 8, 2002, at 06:50 AM. 

2591 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: Re: 9 August Update; date: August 9, 
2002, at 10:44 PM. 

2592 Email from: [REDACTED]; to: [REDACTED]; subject: Greetings; date: August 11, 2002, at 

09:45AM. 

2593 Email from: Jose Rodriguez; to: [REDACTED]; subject: [DETENTION SITE GREEN]; date: August 12, 2002. 

2594 Interview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, Scott W. Muller, 
September 5, 2003. 

- TOP 

Page 474 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










“excess information” in the Abu Zubaydah interrogation 
cables. 2595 


Reporting Abuses 


DIRECTOR HAYDEN: ‘Any 
deviations from approved 
procedures and practices that are 
seen are to be immediately 
reported and immediate 
corrective action taken , including 
referring to the CIA Office of 
Inspector General and to the 
Department of Justice, as 
appropriate.” 


This testimony is not supported by CIA records, for 

example: 

• Multiple individuals involved in the interrogation of 
CIA detainee ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri failed to report 
inappropriate activity. With regard to the unauthorized 
use of a handgun and power drill to threaten al- 
Nashiri, one CIA interrogator stated he did not report 
the incidents because he believed they fell below the 
reporting threshold for the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, while noting he did not 
receive guidance on reporting requirements. The chief 
of Base stated he did not report the incidents because 
he assumed the interrogator had CIA Headquarters’ 
approval and because two senior CIA officials had 
instructed him to scale back on reporting from the 
detention site to CIA Headquarters. The inappropriate 
activity was discovered during a chance exchange 
between recently arrived CIA Headquarters officials 
and security officers. 2596 

• There were significant quantitative and qualitative 
differences between the waterboarding of KSM, as 
applied, and the description of the technique provided 
to the Department of Justice. Neither CIA 
interrogators nor CIA attorneys reported these 
deviations to the inspector general or the Department 
of Justice at the time. 

• Additionally, CIA records indicate that at least 17 
detainees were subjected to CIA enhanced 
interrogation techniques for which they were not 
approved. 2597 


Detainee Statistics 



2595 Interview Report, 2003-71 23-IG, Review of InteiTogations for Counterterrorism Purposes, April 

7, 2003. 

2596 Report of Investigation, Office of the Inspector General, Unauthorized Interrogation Techniques at 
[DETENTION SITE BLUE] (2003 -71 23-IG), 29 October 2003, p. 24 (DTS #2003-4897). 

2597 See Volume III for details. 




Page 475 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



// NOFORN 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “What 
you have there is a matrix. On 
the lefthand side of the matrix are 
the names of the 30 individuals in 
the CIA program who have had 
any ElTs used against them. Mr. 
Chairman and Vice Chairman 
and Members, you’ve heard me 
say this before. In the history of 
the program, we’ve had 97 
detainees. Thirty of the detainees 
have had EITs used against 
them.” 


This testimony is inaccurate. At the time of this 
testimony, there had been least 118 CIA detainees. CIA 
records indicate at least 38 of the detainees had been 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. 2598 


Legal Basis . 


for CIA Detention and Interrogation 


DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “The 
Army field manual is designed 
for the folks at Guantanamo to 
interrogate a rifleman that was in 
the employ of Gulbuddin 
Hekmatyar. That guy never gets 
into our program. The ticket into 


This testimony is incongruent with CIA detention and 
interrogation records. For example, numerous individuals 
had been detained and subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, despite doubts and questions 
surrounding their knowledge of terrorist threats and the 
location of senior al-Qa’ida leadership. They include 
Asadullah, 2599 Mustafa al-Hawsawi, 2600 Abu Hudhaifa, 2601 



2598 See Volume III for details. As discussed in this summary and in greater detail in the full Committee 
Study, on January 5, 2009, a CIA officer informed Director Hayden that additional CIA detainees beyond the 
98 CIA detainees previously briefed to Congress had been identified. A CIA chart indicated there were “13 
New Finds,” additional individuals who had been detained by the CIA, and that the new true number of CIA 
detainees was now at least 1 12. After the briefing with Director Hayden, the CIA officer sent a record of this 
interaction via email only to himself, which stated: “I briefed the additional CIA detainees that could be 
included in RDI numbers. DCIA instructed me to keep the detainee number at 98 -- pick whatever date i 
needed to make that happen but the number is 98.” (See email from: [REDACTED]; to [REDACTED]; 
subject: Meeting with DCIA; date: January 5, 2009, at 10:50 PM.) Shortly thereafter, the final draft of 
prepared remarks by Director Hayden to President-elect Obama’s national security team state: “There have 
been 98 detainees in the history of the CIA program.” 

2599 Interrogators had asked CIA Headquarters for the assessments supporting the decision to subject Asadullah to 
the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, noting that “it would be of enormous help to the interrogator to know 



what is concrete fact and wh at is good analysis 

nHljHHH 34098MHH 




33963 

34812 




response, ALEC Station acknowledged that “[t]o be sure, our case that Asadullah should have a good sense of bin 



Ladin’s location is circumstantial.” ( See ALEC 



|.) The following day, interrogators 



commented^ he simplydoesnotknow the [locational information on AQ leaders].” See 

^■■■■■■34310 ■■■■■. 

2600 Following al-Hawsawi’s first interrogation session, Chief of Interrogations asked CIA 

Headquarters for information on what al-Hawsawi actually “knows,” saying “he does not appear to the [sic] be a 
person that is a financial mastermind. However, we lack facts with which to confront [al-Hawsawi]. What we need 



34757 (101742Z MAR 



at this point is substantive information vice supposition.” See \ 

03). 

2601 Although CIA records include no requests or approval cables for the use of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, Abu Hudhaifa was subjected to ice water baths and 66 hours of standing sleep deprivation. He was 
released because the CIA discovered he was likely not the person he was believed to be. See WASHINGTON DC 

151303 

/NOFORN 

Page 476 of 499 




UNCLASSIFIED 














this program is knowledge of 
threat to the homeland or the 
interests of the United States or 
knowledge of location of 1 or 2' 



Arsala Khan, 2602 ABU TALHA AL-MAGREBI 2603 and 
ABU BAHAR AL-TURKI, 2604 Janat Gul, 2605 Ahmed 
Ghailani, 2606 Sharif al-Masri, 2607 and Sayyid Ibrahim. 2608 

The CIA represented to the OLC that the CIA would only 
use its enhanced interrogation techniques against detainees 
who had knowledge of imminent threats or direct 
involvement in planning and preparing of terrorist actions. 
Not until July 20, 2007, more than three months after this 
testimony, did the OLC approve the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques against detainees based 



2602 CIA Headquarters initially resisted approving Arsal^han^aptoe beeaus^)^Uacl^nnformation 

confirming that he wa s a “continuingthr^^ 169986 email from: 

fflHHHlflHIH; to: and [REDACTED]; subject: Denial 

Approval to Capture Ai il i I li in ilili I Mi |iili ilmilil that Arsala Khan was the individual 

sought by the CIA, interrogators subjected him to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques “to make a better 
ass essment regarding [his] willi ngnes s to start talking, or assess if our subject is, in fact the man we are looking for.” 
See ■■■■■■■ 1373 

2603 Authorization to use the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against ABU TAL HA AL-MAGREBI was 
soug ht in order to “identi fy inconsistencies in [ABU BAHAR AL-TURKI’ s] story.” See 

2604 The true names of these detainees have been replaced with the capitalized pseudonyms AL-MAGREBI and AL- 

TURKI. At the time the two detainees were rendered to CIA custody, the CIA was aware that they were then 
working for a foreign partner government. They were subjected to sleep deprivation and dietary manipulation until 
the CIA confirmed that the detainees had been trying to contact the CIA for weeks to inform tire CIA of what they 
believed were pending al-Qa’ida terrorist attacks. After the CIA had d etermined that AL-M AGREBI and AL- 
TURKI should not be in CIA custody, the two detainees were held for additional months before 

they were released. 

2605 Janat Gul’s CIA interrogators wrote: “Team does not believe [Gul] is witliholdingimminent threatinformation, 

however team will continue to press [Gul] for that during each session.” ( See 1574 (m| 

04).) The interrogation of Janat Gul is described in this summary and detailed in Volume 111. 

2606 j} le qa’ s assessment of Ghailani ’s knowledge of terrorist threats was speculative. As one CIA official noted, 

“[although Ghailani’s role in operational planning is unclear, his respected role in al-Qa’ida and presence in Shkai 
as recently as October 2003 may have provided him some knowledge aboirtongoingattack planning againstthe^ 
United States homeland^andthe^erative^ involved.” See email from: CTC/UBLD HHHIHH 

(formerly ALECHHHHl); to: [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; subject: 
derog information for ODDO on Talha, Ghailani, Hamza Rabi’a and Abu Faraj; date: August 1.0, 2004. 

2607 As noted above, the credibility of the source implicating Sharif al-Masri, Janat Gul, and Ghailani’s connection to 
a pre-election plot was questioned by CIA officials prior to the application of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques against the detainees. The source was later determined to have fabricated the information. 

2608 Five days after interrogators began using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques against Sayyid Ibrahim, 
interrogators cabled CIA Headquarters requesting information that would “definitively link [Ibrahim] to nefarious 
activity or kno wled ge by [Ibra him] of known nefarious activities of al-Qa’ida members, if this is possible.” (See 

1324 SHHfEB 04).) Without receiving a response, they continued using the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques against Ibrahim. CIA Headquarters, which rejected an assessment from two CIA debriefers 
that Ibrahim was, “at best... a low-level facilitator,” would later indicate that it was “unce rtain” he would meet the 

B uirements for U.S. mi litary or foreign governmen t detention. ( See HEADQUARTERS 

; HEADQUARTERS Other detainees, Abd al-Karim and Abu Hazim, were 

subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques “in an attenipttomorerapidlyassess[th knowledg^f 
pending attacks, operational planning , and w hereabouts of UBL. ” See 36843 

36908 



Page 477 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 






















UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



/ /NOFORN 





on their suspected knowledge of the locations of UBL or 
Ayman al-Zawahiri. 2609 Prior to July 20, 2007, in the case 
of at least six CIA detainees, the use of the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques was nonetheless 
predicated on the assessment that the detainees possessed 
“locational information” on senior HVTs, to include UBL 
or Ayman al-Zawahiri. 2610 


Intelligence Reporting from Overall Detainee Population 


DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “Since 
we began this in the summer of 
2002, the 97 detainees have 
helped us by their testimony 
create 8,000 intelligence reports.” 
SENATOR SNOWE: “Of the 
8,000 intelligence reports that 
were provided, as you said, by 30 
of the detainees 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “By all 
97, ma’am.” 2611 


CIA representations suggesting that every CIA detainee 
provided intelligence reporting are not supported by CIA 
records. A detailed reporting chart is provided in Volume 
II. CIA reporting records indicate that 34 percent of all 
CIA detainees produced no intelligence reports, and nearly 
70 percent produced fewer than 15 intelligence reports. 

Of the 39 detainees who were, according to CIA records, 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
nearly 20 percent produced no intelligence reports, while 
40 percent produced fewer than 15 intelligence reports. 



2609 OLC defined a High-Value Detainee as “a detainee who, until time of capture, we have reason to believe: 

(1) is a senior member of al-Qai’da or an al-Qai’da associated terrorist group (Jemaah Islamiyyah, Eqyptian [sic] 
Islamic Jihad, al-Zarqawi Group, etc.); (2) has knowledge of imminent terrorist threats against the USA, its military 
forces, its citizens and organizations, or its allies; or that has/had direct involvement in planning and preparing 
terrorist actions against the USA or its allies, or assisting the al-Qai’da leadership in planning and preparing such 
terrorist actions; and (3) if released, constitutes a clear and continuing threat to the USA or its allies” (Memorandum 
for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, 

Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 10, 2005, Re: Application of 18 U.S.C. 
Sections 2340-2340A to Certain Techniques That May Be Used in the Interrogation of a High Value al Qaeda 
Detainee (DTS #2009-1810, Tab 9); Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central 
Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal 
Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations Under Article 16 of the Convention Against 
Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of High Value Al Qaeda Detainees (DTS 
#2009-1810, Tab 11)). Memorandum for John A. Rizzo, Acting General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from 
Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, July 20, 2007, Re: 
Application of the War Crimes Act, the Detainee Treatment Act, and Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions 
to Certain Techniques that May Be Used by the CIA in the Interrogation of High Value al Qaeda Detainees (DTS 
#2009-1810, Tab 14) (“The CIA informs us that it currently views possession of information regarding the location 
of Osama bin Laden or Ayman al-Zawahiri as warranting application of enhanced techniques, if other conditions are 
met.”) 



2610 R idha Ahmad al -Najjar (| 
Baliirl 




11542 



; ALEC 



I; Ghairat 



Majid Bin Muhammad Bin Sulayman Khayil aka Arsala Khan 




31118 
40471 
10673 



|; ‘Umar ‘A bd al- Rahman aka Asadull ah (CIA 

10673 ■^^^^^■jDIRECTOR 

Adnan al - 

17581 



|; Sayyid Ibrahim 



1294 



2611 Similar representations had been made by Director Hayden on September 6, 2006. Senator Bayh: “I was 
impressed by your statement about how effective the [CIA’s enhanced interrogation] techniques have been in 
eliciting important information to the country, at one point up to 50 percent of our information about al-Qa’ida. I 
think you said 9000 different intelligence reportsT^Directo^Jayden^Over8000, sir.” Senator Bayh: “And yet 

TOP 

Page 478 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



CIA Detainee Reporting and Captures of Terrorists 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: 
“Detainee reporting has played a 
role in nearly every capture of 
key al-Qa’ida members and 
associates since 2002.” 



The CIA consistently represented that the interrogation of 
CIA detainees using the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques resulted in critical and otherwise unavailable 
intelligence that led to the capture of specific terrorists, to 
include, among others: KSM, Majid Khan, Ramzi bin al- 
Shibh, lyman Faris, Saleh al-Marri, Ammar al-Baluchi, 
Khallad bin Attash, Sajid Badat, and Dhiren Barot. 2612 
These representations were inaccurate. 



The CIA } s Detention and Interrogation Program Led to the Capture of Hambali and the 

Karachi “Cell” 



The chronology provided in this testimony, which is 
consistent with other CIA representations, is inaccurate. 
Prior to KSM’s capture, in early January 2003, coverage 
of a known al-Qa’ida email account uncovered 
communications between the account and a former 
Baltimore, Maryland, resident, Majid Khan. The 
communications indicated that Majid Khan traveled to 
Bangkok for terrorist support activities and was in contact 
there with a “Zubair.” 2613 By this time, the CIA had 
significant intelligence indicating that a “Zubair” played a 
central supporting role in Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), was 
af filiated with al-Qa’id a figures like KSM, had expertise 
in i n Southeast Asia, and was 

suspected of playing a role in Hambali’ s October 12, 

2002, Bali bombings. 2614 On March 6, 2003, the day after 
Majid Khan was captured (the capture was unrelated to 
CIA detainee reporting), and while being questioned by 
foreign government interrogators using rapport-building 
techniques, Majid Khan described how he traveled to 
Bangkok and provided $50,000 USD to Zubair at the 
behest of al-Qa’ida. 2615 Majid Khan’s physical description 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “March 
2003, KSM gives us information 
about an al-Qa’ida operative, 
Majid Khan... KSM was aware 
that Majid had been recently 
captured. KSM, possibly 
believing that Khan was talking , 
admitted to having tasked Majid 
with delivering $50,000 to some 
of Hambali’ s operatives in 
December 2002. . . So now we go 
to [Majid] Khan and we tell him, 
hey, your uncle just told us about 
the money. He acknowledged 
that he delivered the money to an 
operative named Zubair. He 
provided Zubair' s physical 
description and phone number. 
Based on that | captured 
Zubair in June .” 



this has come from, I guess, only thirty individuals.” Director Hayden: “No, sir, 96, all 96” (Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence, Briefing by the Director, Central Intelligence Agency, on the Central Intelligence 
Agency Detention, Interrogatior^nd Rendition Program, September 6, 2006 (DTS #2007-1336)). 

26.2 See, for example, flflUHK Memorandum for the Record; subject: Meeting with Deputy Chief, 
Counterterrorist Center ALEC Station; date: 17 July 2003; Memorandum for: Inspector General; from: James Pavitt, 
Deputy Director for Operations; subject: re (S) Comments to Draft IG Special Review, “Counterterrorism Detention 
and Interrogation Program” (2003-7 123-IG); date: February 27, 2004; attachment: February 24, 2004, Memorandum 
re Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities; CIA briefing slides entitled, “C/A 
Interrogation Program . ” dated July 29, 2003, presented to senior White House officials; Hearing of the Senate 
Select Committee on Intelligence, February 14, 2007 (DTS #2007-1337). For additional details, see Volume II. 

26.3 ALEC ■■ (1701 17Z JAN 03) 

26.4 See intelligence chronology in Volume II. 

26.5 A cable describing the foreign government interrogation of Majid Khan stated, “[a foreign government officer] 
talked quietly to [Majid Khan] alone for about ten minutes before the interview began and was able to establish an 



Page 479 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









UNCLASSIFIED 




DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “Zubair 
enters the program. During 
debriefing, Zubair reveals he 
worked directly for Hambali. He 
rovides information on ^ 

Hambali and a 




of Zubair matched previous intelligence reporting already 
collected on Zubair. 2616 

When confronted with this information, KSM confirmed 
the reporting, but denied knowing Zubair. 2617 

By May 2003, th e CIA learned that a source the CIA had 
been developing, HHHHHBIHIHHH 



later, the source alerted the CIA that Zubair would 

Acting on t his information, 

Thai authorities, captured Zubair 

on June 8, 2003. 



This testimony is incongruent with CIA records. Prior to 
entering the CIA’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 
while still in foreign government custody, Zubai r was 
questioned about his efforts to obtain fraudulent^^B 
documen ts, as well as his phone contact with 
mm [Business Q] 

Zubair admitted to seekingillegai ^^^Bdocumen ts on 
behalf of Ha mbali, as well as using^BH BBBI 
[Business Q] 

detention records do not state what immediate 
investigativestepsthe CIA or Thai authorities took with 
regard to [Business Q], although signals 

intelligence had indicated that Zubair had been in frequent 
contact with the company. 2621 

After being rendered to CIA custody, Zubair was 
immediately subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 




excellent level of rapport. (See 1367^070724^MA^03)^Records indicate that this information was 

also disseminated in FBI channels. See ALEC HHI HHHHIHH* 

2616 See intellige nce chronology in Volume II. 

2617 ■■■I 1367 8 (070724Z MAR 03), dissemina ted as ■■■ 10865 (171648Z MAR 

03), disseminated as ■■■■■; 10866 (171832Z MAR 03). Prior to Majid Khan’s reporting 

in foreign government custody, the CIA was aware from sources outside of the CIA detainee program that KSM had 
used couriers to transfer money to Hambali. Even while be ing questioned about such t ransfers , however, KSM 
made no m ention of Majid Khan. See DIRECTOR ■■(251938ZSEP 02); ALEC (072345Z MAR 03); 

10755 (1 1 1455Z MAR 03), disseminated 






i Lis nrai •) nb 






Page 480 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 


















UNCLASSIFIED 




DIRECTOR HAYDEN: 
“Working with [an entity of a 
foreign government], we used 
that information to capture 
another Hambali lieutenant, a 
fellow named Lillie — who is also 
on your list [of CIA detainees] - 
who provided the location of 
Hambali. And that location 
information led us to his 
capture.” 



interrogation techniques. After days of being 
questioned about ot her ma tters, Zubair was asked about 
his efforts to obtain m|documents for Hambali, at 
which point he again acknowledged usin 



[Business Q] 



When T hai authorities 

approached “a contact” at [Business Q], they 

were provided 



In an operation that included surveillance of 
[Business Q], Hambali associate Amer was arrested on 
August 11, 2003. 2625 Amer was immediately cooperative 
and assisted in the arrest of Lillie hours later at 
approximately 6:00 PM. 2626 During his arrest, Lillie was 
found to have a key fob in his possession imprinted with 
an address of an apartment building in Ayutthaya, 
Thailand. In response to questioning, “within minutes of 
capture,” Lillie admitted that the address on the key fob 
was the address where Hambali was located. Less than 
four hours later, Hambali was captured at the address 
found on the key fob. 2627 



According to the chief of the CTC’s Southeast Asia 
Branch: 



“[The CIA] stumbled onto Hambali. We stumbled 
onto the [source]... picking u p the phone and ca lling 
his case officer to say there’s ...we 

really stumbled over it. It wasn’t police work, it 




Page 481 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFQRN 





wasn’t good targeting, it was we stumbled over it 
and it yielded up Hambali.” 2628 


KSM, Hambali, ana 


the Karachi “ Cell ” ( the al-Ghuraba Group) 


DIRECTOR HAYDEN; 
“Bringing this story full circle, 
‘Abdul al-Hadi then identifies a 
cell of JI operatives whom 
Hambali had sent to Karachi for 
another al-Qa’ida operation. We 
take this information from Abdul 
Hadi to his brother, Hambali. 
Hambali then admits that he was 
grooming members of the cell for 
a U.S. operation, at the guidance 
of KSM — remember, this is 
where this started — and we’re 
almost certain these were the 
guys trying to implement KSM’s 
plot to fly hijacked planes into 
the tallest buildings on the west 
coast of the United States.” 


CIA Director Hayden’s reference to “the guys trying to 
implement KSM’s plot to fly hijacked planes into the 
tallest buildings on the west coast of the United States,” is 
a reference to the al-Ghuraba student group and KSM’s 
“Second Wave” plotting detailed in this summary and in 
greater detail in Volume II. 262t) 

A review of CIA records found that contrary to CIA 
representations, Hambali’s brother, ‘Abdul al-Hadi, aka 
Gunawan, who was in foreign government custody, did 
not identify a “cell of JI operatives whom Hambali had 
sent to Karachi for another al-Qa’ida operation.” He 
identified “a group of Malaysian and Indonesian students 
in Karachi” who were witting of his affiliation with 
Jemaah Islamiyah. 2630 CIA officers on site recalled other 
intelligence reporting indicating that KSM planned to use 
Malaysians in the “next wave of attacks,” connected it to 
Gunawan’ s statements about Malaysian students, and 
reported that Gunawan had just identified “a group of 16 
individuals, most all of whom are Malaysians.” 2631 
Records indicate that it was this initial analysis that led the 
CIA to consider the group a KSM “cell” for the “next 
wave of attacks.” 

While Hambali was being subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques, he was confronted 
about KSM’s efforts to find pilots, as well as information 
on the al-Ghuraba group — which the CIA assessed was a 
KSM “cell.” Hambali told his CIA interrogators “that 
some of the members of [the al-Ghuraba group] were 
destined to work for al-Qa’ida if everything had gone 



2628 CIA Oral History Program Documenting Hambali capture, interview of [REDACTED |, interviewed by 
| REDACTED), on November 28, 2005. 

2< ’ 2 '’ [REDACTED] 45915 (141 43 1 Z SEP 03). See also February 27, 2004, Memorandum for CIA Inspector General 
from James L. Pavitt, CIA Deputy Director for Operations, entitled “Comments to Draft IG Special Review, 
“Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Program,” which contains a February 24, 2004, attachment entitled, 
“Successes of CIA’s Counterterrorism Detention and Interrogation Activities”; CIA Intelligence Product entitled, 
“Jemaah Islamiya: Counterterrorism Scrutiny Limiting Extremist Agenda in Pakistan,” dated April 18, 2008; KSM 
mil Hambali re porting from October 2003 in Volumes II and III. 

153591 



15359 



TOP SECRET// 



A NOFORN 



Page 482 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 




according to plan,” and that “KSM told him to provide as 
many pilots as he could.” 2632 

Months later, on November 30, 2003, after three weeks of 
being questioned by a debriefer “almost entirely in Bahasa 
Indonesia,” Hambali admitted to fabricating information 
during the period he was being subjected to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. According to 
Hambali, he fabricated these claims “in an attempt to 
reduce the pressure on himself’ and “to give an account 
that was consistent with what [Hambali] assessed the 
questioners wanted to hear.” 2633 A November 30, 2003, 
cable noted that CIA personnel “assesse[d] [Hambali]’ s 
admission of previous fabrication to be credible.” 

Hambali then consistently described “the al-Ghuraba 
organization” as a “development camp for potential future 
J1 operatives and leadership, vice a JI cell or an 
orchestrated attempt by JI to initiate JI operations outside 
of Southeast Asia.” This description was consistent and 
corroborative of other intelligence reporting. 2634 

A wide body of intelligence reporting indicates that, 
contrary to CIA representations, the al-Ghuraba group was 
not “tasked” with, or witting, of any aspect of the “Second 
Wave” plotting. 2635 

While KSM’s reporting varied, KSM stated “he did not 
yet view the group as an operational pool from which to 
draft operatives.” 2636 An October 27, 2006, CIA cable 
stated that “all of the members of the JI al-Ghuraba cell 
have been released,” 2637 while an April 18, 2008, CIA 
intelligence report referencing the al-Ghuraba group 



2633 

2634 



2632 See the intelligence chronology in Volume II, including [REDACTED] 45953 (151 24 1 Z SEP 03) 

[R EDACTE D] 1323 (161749Z SEP 03). 
m 1142 (301055Z NOV 03) 

See intelligence chronology in Volume II. Although NSA signals intelligence was not provided for this Study, 
an April 2008 CIA intelligence report on the Jemaah Islamiya noted that the al-Ghuraba group “consisted of the sons 
of JI leaders, many of whom completed basic militant training in Afghanistan and Pakistan while enrolled at Islamic 
universities in Karachi,” and that this assessment was based on “signals intelligence and other reporting.” See CIA 
Intelligence Product entitled, “Jemaah Islamiya: Counterterrorism Scrutiny Limiting Extremist Agenda in Pakistan,” 
dated April 1 8, 2008. 

2635 See intelligen ce chronology in Volume I I. 

10223 ( 221317Z OCT 03); ■■■^■1 
2637 WASHINGTON DC ■■■ (2721 13ZOCT06) 



TOP SECRET// 



//NOFORN 



Page 483 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 




DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “As 
before, with these seven 
[enhanced interrogation 
techniques] we use the least 
coercive measures to create 
cooperation at a predictable, 
reliable, sustainable level. They 
are used to create a state of 
cooperation. Once the state of 
cooperation is created, we simply 
productively debrief the detainee. 
On average, we get to that state 
of cooperation in a period 
measured by about one to two 
weeks.” 

“When we’re asking him 
questions during that period of 
increased stress, when we’re 
being more rather than less 
coercive, we are generally asking 
him questions for which we know 
the answers. Otherwise, how do 
we know we have moved him 
from a spirit of defiance into a 
spirit of cooperation? And only 
after we have moved him into 
this second stage do we then 
begin to ask him things we really 
think he knows but we don’t.” 



makes no reference to the group serving as potential 
operatives for KSM’s “Second Wave” plotting. 2638 



The Interrogation Process 



This testimony is incongruent with CIA records. As is 
detailed throughout the Committee Study, CIA detainees 
were frequently subjected to the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques immediately after being rendered 
to CIA custody. 2639 CIA interrogators asked open-ended 
questions of CIA detainees, to which the CIA did not 
know the answers, while subjecting detainees to the CIA’s 
enhanced interrogation techniques. This approach began 
with Abu Zubaydah, whose interrogation focused on him 
being told to provide “the one thing you don’t want me to 
know,” 2640 and remained a central feature of the program. 
Numerous CIA detainees were determined never to have 
reached a “state of cooperation.” Several detainees, when 
subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques, 
transitioned to normal debriefing, and were then subjected 
to one or more additional periods of being subjected to the 
techniques. 2641 




26 j» cia intelligence Product entitled, “Jemaah Islamiya: Counterterrorism Scrutiny Limiting Extremist Agenda in 
Pakistan,” dated April 18, 2008. 

2639 Numerous detainees were stripped and shackled, nude, in the standing stress position for sleep deprivation or 
subjected to other enhanced interrogation techniques prior to being questioned by an int errogator. See for example 
KSM 3449 1 (Q51400Z MAR 03); Asadullah (DIRECTOR ■■■ 03 



Abu Yasir al-Jaza in 35558 ( 



35787 ( 



MAY 03)); Hambali 

; and Majid Khan 46471 (241242Z MAY 03); 39077 

(27 1719Z MAY 03). 

2640 HI 10016 (120509Z APR 02); ■■■ 10594 (061558Z AUG 02) 

2641 See detainee reviews in Volume III for additional information. 



Page 484 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













Use of Detainee Reporting 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: The CIA regularly disseminated intelligence reports based 

“Nothing that we get from the on uncorroborated statements from CIA detainees. The 

program, however, is used in reports, some of which included fabricated or otherwise 

isolation. It’s a data point that inaccurate information, required extensive FBI 
then has to be nibbed up against investigations. 2642 For example, the CIA disseminated 

all the other data points we have information that KSM had sent Abu Issa al-Britani to 

available to us.” Montana to recruit African-American Muslim converts. 2643 

In June 2003, KSM stated he fabricated the information 
because he was “under ‘enhanced measures’ when he 
made these claims and simply told his interrogators what 
he thought they wanted to hear.” 2644 Other KSM 
fabrications led the CIA to capture and detain suspected 

terrorists who were later found to be innocent. 2645 

The Religious Foundation for Cooperation 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “This The CIA made a similar representation to the Department 
proposed program you have in of Justice in the context of Abu Zubaydah. 2647 CIA 
front of you has been informed records do not indicate that CIA detainees described a 
by our experience and it has been religious basis for cooperating in association with the 
informed by the comments of our CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques. 2648 



2642 p ()r exam pie 5 on ]y[ a y 15 and May 16, 2003, the FBI hosted a conference on KSM and investigations resulting 
from KSM’s reporting. The agenda included al-Qa’ida recruitment efforts in the U.S., a to pic on which KSM had 
provided signifi cant fabricated information. ( See Memorandum from: [RE DACTED]; for: 

[REDAC TED], | —H 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 





[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 

|, [REDACTED], 



I, [REDACTED], 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [ REDACTED], [REDACTED], | 

[REDACTED], [REDACTED], 




I, [REDACTED], [REDACTED]; 



7:25:15 PM; 
DEC 05); | 



I; subject: Thanks from FBI; da te: Ma> 
12558 (041938Z AUG 03); 



17, 2003, at 
31148 (17191 9Z 



[REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], [REDACTED], 
date: 8 May 2003.) See also Email fro m: [REDACTED]; t o: 

cc:^_ _ 

12095 (222049Z JUN 03); 

31147 (171919Z DEC 05), disseminated as 
10942 (221610Z MAR 03), disseminated as 
03) , dissemina ted as 

12095 (222049Z JUN 03) 

The CIA captured and detained two individuals whom KSM had identified as the protectors of his children. 



2643 



2644 

2645 




10948 (222101Z MAR 



34569 (061722Z MAR 03); 



KSM later described his reporting as “all lies.” See 
1281 (130801Z JUN 04). 

2647 The CIA has referred only to Abu Zubaydah in the context of this representation. See Memorandum for John A. 
Rizzo, Senior Deputy General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, from Steven G. Bradbury, Principal Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, May 30, 2005, Re: Application of United States Obligations 
Under Article 16 of the Convention Against Torture to Certain Techniques that May be Used in the Interrogation of 
High Value A1 Qaeda Detainees. The OLC document states: “As Zubaydah himself explained with respect to 
enhanced techniques, ‘brothers who are captured and interrogated are permitted by Allah to provide information 
when they believe they have ‘reached the limit of their ability to withhold it’ in the fact of psychological and 
physical hardships.” 

2648 wiu| e there are no records of CIA detainees making these statements, the Deputy Chief of ALEC Station, 

■■■■■, told the Inspector General on July 17, 2003, thaUhe^lbesHnformatio^ on 

how to handle the [CIA] detainees came from a walk-in [a source| 

1 to volunteer information to the CJ^jafterthear^ He told us we were 

Page 485 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 

















UNCLASSIFIED 



detainees. It’s built on the 
particular psychological profile 
of the people we have and expect 
to get -- al-Qa’ida operatives. 
Perceiving themselves true 
believers in a religious war, 
detainees believe they are 
morally bound to resist until 
Allah has sent them a burden too 
great for them to withstand. At 
that point — and that point varies 
by detainee — their cooperation 
in their own heart and soul 
becomes blameless and they 
enter into this cooperative 
relationship with our debriefers.” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: 
“Number one, we use the 
enhanced interrogation 
techniques at the beginning of 
this process, and it varies how 
long it takes, but I gave you a 
week or two as the normal 
window in which we actually 
helped this religious zealot to get 
over his own personality and put 
himself in a spirit of 
cooperation.” 



The CIA has referred only to Abu Zubaydah in the context 
of this representation. As detailed, Abu Zubaydah 
referenced religion in the context of his cooperation prior 
to being subjected to the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques. On May 14, 2002, more than two months 
before Abu Zubaydah began his August 2002 enhanced 
interrogation period, Abu Zubaydah told interrogators that 
“if he possessed any more information on future threats, 
then he would provide this information to us to help 
himself, claiming that ‘the sharia’ gives him permission to 
do so in his current situation.” 2649 Abu Zubaydah also 
made a similar statement to his interrogators 
approximately a week later — again, prior to the use of the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques — stating that he 
had “prayed his ‘Istikharah’ (seeking God’s guidance) and 
was now willing to tell what he really knew,” and “that he 
had received guidance from God” to cooperate to “prevent 
his captured brothers from having a difficult time.” 2650 
Further, Abu Zubaydah maintained that he always 
intended to provide information and never believed he 
could withhold information from interrogators. 2651 In 
February 2003, he told a CIA psychologist that he 
believed every captured “brother” would talk in detention, 
and that these “brothers should be able to expect that the 
organization will make adjustments to protect people and 
plans when someone with knowledge is captured.” 2652 
Abu Zubaydah stated he conveyed this perspective to 
trainees at a terrorist training camp. 2653 



VICE CHAIRMAN BOND: 
“Once you get past that time 
period, once you have convinced 
them that Allah gives them the 
green light, that’s when you get 
the 8,000 intelligence reports.” 



Page 486 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “That’s 
correct, Senator, when we get the 
subject into this zone of 
cooperation. I think, as you 
know, in two-thirds of the 
instances we don’t need to use 
any of the techniques to get the 
individual into the zone of 
cooperation.” 



SENATOR NELSON: “How do 
you suspect that al-Qa’ida 
operatives are training in order to 
counter your techniques?” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “You 
recall the policy on which this is 
based, that we’re going to give 
him a burden that Allah says is 
too great for you to bear, so they 
can put the burden down.” 2646 



Threats Related to Sodomy, Arrest of Famil 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “Many 
assertions [in the ICRC report] 
regarding physical or threatened 
abuse are egregious and are 
simply not true. On their face, 
they aren’t even credible. 
Threats of acts of sodomy, the 



This testimony is incongruent with CIA interrogation 
records. 

• As documented in the May 2004 Inspector General 
Special Review and other CIA records, interrogators 
threatened ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, KSM, and Abu 
Zubaydah with harm to their families. 2654 



2646 In addition, CIA officer mm|| testified at the April 12, 2007, Committee hearing: “I spoke with 
Zubaydah. I was at one of these facilities for several months and I spent around 18 hours a day with Abu Zubaydah. 
At the conclusion of my time, as I was leaving the facility, he spoke with me, and he said there is something I need 
you to understand - to go back to the question that came earlier about walling and a collar. He looked at the 
plywood wall in the cell and said I want to thank you for that. I’ve had a lot of time to sit and reflect, and 1 
understand why that’s there. That’s there so I don’t get hurt. In terms of the totality of the experience, his advice 
was I may have been the first person, but you need to continue to do this because I need to be able to live with who I 
am and I will continue to be the religious believing person I am, but you had to get me to the point where I could 
have absolution from my god to cooperate and deal with your questions. So he thanked us for bringing him to that 
point, beyond which he knew his religious beliefs absolved him from cooperating with us.” There are no CIA 
records to support this testimony. 

2654 According to the Inspector General Special Review, a debriefer threatened al-Nashiri by saying “[w]e could get 
your mother in here,” and, “[w]e can bring your family in here.” In addition, one of KSM’s interrogators told the 
inspector general that the psychologist/interrogators told KSM that, if anything hap pens in the United States, 
“[w]e’re going to kill your children.” ( See Special Review, pp. 42-43; interview 

[REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 30 April 2003; interv^^^^^BH^I^BHl 
by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, 22 October 2003; 

(11 1505Z MAR 03).) According to a CIA cable, a case officer “used [Abu Zubaydah’s] ‘family card’ to apply more 
psychological pressure on [Abu Zubaydah].” The cable stated that the case officer “advised [Abu Zubaydah] that 
even if [Abu Zubaydah] did not care about himself... [Abu Zubaydah] should at least care about his family and keep 



Page 487 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 







UNCLASSIFIED 



arrest and rape of family 
members, the intentional 
infection of HIV or any other 
diseases have never been and 
would never be authorized. 
There are no instances in which 
such threats or abuses took 
place.” 



Rectal exams were standard operating procedure for 
security purposes. A June 2002 cable noted that Abu 
Zubaydah was mildly “tense,” “likely an anticipatory 
reaction given his recent unexpected rectal exam” the 
previous day. 2655 

At least five detainees were subjected to rectal 
rehydration or rectal feeding. There is at least one 
record of Abu Zubaydah receiving “rectal fluid 
resuscitation” for “partially refusing liquids.” 2656 
According to CIA records, Majid Khan was “very 
hostile” to rectal feeding and removed the rectal tube 
as soon as he was allowed to. 2657 KSM was subjected 
to rectal rehydration without a determination of 
medical need, a proced ure that KSM i nterrogator and 
chief of interrogations, WO uld later 

characterize as illustrative of the interrogator’s “total 
control over the detainee.” 2658 Marwan al-Jabbur was 
subjected to what was originally referred to in a cable 
as an “enema,” but was later acknowledged to be rectal 
rehydration. 2659 Both al-Nashiri 2660 and Majid Khan 
were subjected to rectal feeding. 2661 



mm tm 






m 



ZDEC 



333 




UNCLASSIFIED 


















• Three detainees, Rarazi bin al-Shibh, Khallad bin 
Attash and Adnan al-Libi, were threatened with rectal 

rehydration. 2662 

Punches and Kicks 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: This testimony is incongruent with CIA records. 

“Punches and kicks are not Interviews conducted for two CIA internal reviews related 

authorized and have never been to Gul Rahman’s death provided details on CIA 
employed.” 2663 interrogations at the CIA’s DETENTION SITE COBALT. 

In an interview report, CIA contractor DUNBAR 
described the “hard” or “rough” takedown used at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT. According to the 
interview report of DUNBAR, “there were approximately 
five CIA officers from the renditions team... they opened 
the door of Rahman’s cell and rushed in screaming and 
yelling for him to ‘get down.’ They dragged him outside, 
cut off his clothes and secured him with Mylar tape. They 
covered his head with a hood and ran him up and down a 
long corridor adjacent to his cell. They slapped him and 
punched him several times. [DUNBAR] stated that 
although it was obvious they were not trying to hit him as 
hard as they could, a couple of times the punches were 
forceful. As they ran him along the corridor, a couple of 
times he fell and they dragged him through the dirt (the 
floor outside of the cells is dirt). Rahman did acquire a 
number of abrasions on his face, legs, and hands, but 
nothing that required medical attention. (This may 
account for the abrasions found on Rahman’s body after 
his death. Rahman had a number of surface abrasions on 
his shoulders, pelvis, arms, legs, and face.)” 2664 

The use of the “hard” or “rough” takedown, as used on 
Gul Rahman, was described by the CIA officer in charge 
of the CIA’s DETENTION SITE COBALT as “employed 
often in interrogations at [DETENTION SITE COBALT] 
as ‘part of the atmospherics.’” 2665 



2662 See Volume 111 for additional information. 

2663 The CIA’s June 2013 Response states, “DCIA Hayden stated that ‘punches’ and ‘kicks’ were not authorized 
techniques and had never been employed and that CIA officers never threatened a detainee or his family.” The 
CIA’s June 2013 Response adds: “Part of that assertion was an error. The DCIA would have been better served if 
the Agency had framed a response for him that discussed CIA’s policy prohibiting such conduct, and how the 
Agency moved to address unsanctioned behavior which had occurred (including punches and kicks) and implement 
clear guidelines.” 

2664 Memorandum for Deputy Director of Operations, from m|||||, January 28, 2003, Subject: Death 
Investigation - Gul RAHMAN, pp. 21-22. 

2605 CIA Inspector General report, “Report of Investigation, Death of a Detainee (2003-7402-IG), 

April 27, 2003, at 38. 




Page 489 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








Hygiene 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: This testimony is incongruent with CIA records. CIA 

“Detainees have never been detainees, particularly those subjected to standing sleep 

denied the means — at a deprivation, were routinely placed in diapers. Waste 

minimum, they’ve always had a buckets were not always available. In the interrogation of 
bucket — to dispose of their Abu Hazim, a waste bucket was removed from his cell for 

human waste.” punishment. According to a CIA cable, Abu Hazim 

“requested a bucket in which he could relieve himself, but 

was told all rewards must be earned.” 2666 

Medical Personnel and Medical Care 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “The CIA records detail how throughout the program, CIA 
medical section of the 1CRC medical personnel cleared detainees for the use of the 

report concludes that the CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques and played a 

association of CIA medical central role in deciding whether to continue, adjust, or 

officers with the interrogation alter the use of the techniques against detainees. For 
program is ‘contrary to example: 

international standards of 

medical ethics.’ That is just • Prior to the initiation of the CIA’s enhanced 

wrong. The role of CIA medical interrogation techniques against Abu Zubaydah, CIA 
officers in the detainee program Headquarters, with medical personnel participation, 

is and always has been and stated that the “interrogation process takes precedence 

always will be to ensure the over preventative medical procedures.” 2667 

safety and the well-being of the 

detainee. The placement of • Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi was provided medication for 

medical officers during the swelling in his legs to allow for continued standing 

interrogation techniques sleep deprivation. 2668 

represents an extra measure of 

caution. Our medical officers do 

not recommend the employment 

or continuation of any procedures 

or techniques.” 



2666 37493 

2667 ALEC^HBl0^2321ZJUL 02). According to the CIA attorney who reviewed the videotapes of the 
interrogation of Abu Zubaydah, “the person he assumed was a medical officer was dressed completely in black from 
head to toe, and was indistinguishable from other [interrogation] team members.” See June 18, 2003, Interview 
Report of [REDACTED], Office of General Counsel Assistant General Counsel. 

2668 A b u j a ’f ar a i_ir a qi was subjected to nudity, dietary manipulation, insult slaps, abdominal slaps, attention grasps, 
facial holds, walling, stress positions, and water dousing with 44 degree Fahrenheit water for 18 minutes. He was 
shackled in the standing position for 54 hours as part of sleep deprivation, and experienced swelling in his lower 
legs requiring blood thinner and spiral ace bandages. He was moved to a sitting position, and his sleep deprivation 
was extended to 78 hours. After the swelling subsided, he was provided with more blood thinner and was returned 
to the standing position. The sleep deprivation was extended to 102 hours. After four hours of sleep, Abu Ja’far al- 
Iraqi was subjected to an additional 52 hours of sleep deprivation, after which CIA Headquarters informed 
interrogators that eight hours of sleep was the minimum. In addition to the swelling, Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi also 
experiencedan edemaonhishead due to walling, ab rasion s on his n eck, and b listers on h is ankl es from sh ackles. 

1810(^HH DEC 05k^HPH 18H(^HB DEC 05); 1819 JHlj||DEC05); 

■MF84 7 (■■■DEC 05); ■■■1848 (^■|DEC 05); HEADQUARTERS 
DEC 05). See additional information on Abu Ja’far al-Iraqi in Volume III. 




Page 490 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 












DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “The This testimony is incongruent with CIA records. For 
allegation in the report that a CIA example, as CIA interrogators prepared for the August 
medical officer threatened a 2002 “enhanced interrogation” phase of Abu Zubaydah’s 

detainee, stating that medical interrogation, the CIA’s DETENTION SITE GREEN 
care was conditional on noted, and CIA Headquarters confirmed, that the 

cooperation is blatantly false. interrogation process would take precedence over 

Health care has always been preventing Abu Zubaydah’s wounds from becoming 

administered based upon detainee infected. 2669 DETENTION SITE GREEN personnel also 
needs. It’s neither policy nor stated that delaying a medical session for 72 hours after 

practice to link medical care to the start of the new phase of interrogation would convey 

any other aspect of the detainee to Abu Zubaydah that his level of medical care was 
program.” contingent upon his cooperation. 2670 On August 10, 2002, 

SENATOR HATCH: “Has there the medical officer at DETENTION SITE GREEN stated 
been any use of any kind of drug that, under the model of medical intervention that the 
or withholding of any kind of detention site was following during the most aggressive 
drug or medication?” interrogation phase, Abu Zubaydah’s medical status was 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “No, likely to deteriorate to an “unacceptable level” over the 

absolutely not.” next two weeks 2671 On August 25, 2002, the Base stated 

that the “combination of a lack of hygiene, sub-optimal 
nutrition, inadvertent trauma to the wound secondary to 
some of the stress techniques utilized at that stage, and the 
removal of formal obvious medical care to further isolate 
the subject had an overall additive effect on the 
deterioration of the wound.” 2672 

Abu Zubaydah lost his left eye while in CIA custody. In 
October 2002, DETENTION SITE GREEN recommended 
that the vision in his right eye be tested, noting that “|w]e 
have a lot riding upon his ability to see, read and write.” 
DETENTION SITE GREEN stressed that “this request is 
driven by our intelligence needs vice humanitarian 
concern for AZ.” 2673 

CIA detainees Abu Hazirn and Abd al-Karim each broke a 
foot while trying to escape capture and were placed in 
casts; Abd al-Karim’ s medical evaluation upon entry into 
CIA custody included a recommendation that he not be 
subjected to “extended standing for a couple of weeks,” 




AU G 02) 

2673 ■■Ul 



10536 (151006Z JULY 02); ALEC 
10536 (151006Z JULY 02) 

10607 (100335Z AUG 02) 

10647 (201 33 1Z AUG 02); ■■ 



11026 (070729Z OCT 02) 

TOP SECRET// 



| (182321Z JUL 02) 



10618 (121448Z AUG 02); 



10679 (250932Z 



/7NQFQRN 



Page 491 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 










UNCLASSIFIED 




which was then extended to three months. 2674 A cable 
describing the CIA enhanced interrogation techniques to 
be used on the two detainees stated that the interrogator 
would “forego cramped confinement, stress positions, 
walling, and vertical shackling (due to [the detainees’] 
injury).” 2675 Abd al-Karim was nonetheless subjected to 
two 45-minute sessions of cramped confinement, 2676 
repeated walling, and a stress position that involved 
placing his “head on [the] wall, bent at waist, shuffled 
backwards to a safe, yet uncomfortable position.” 2677 As 
part of sleep deprivation, he was also “walked for 15 
minutes every half-hour through the night and into the 
morning.” 2678 A few days later, a cable stated that, even 
given the best prognosis, Abd al-Karim would have 
arthritis and limitation of motion for the rest of his life. 2679 
Meanwhile, Abu Hazim was subjected to repeated 
walling. 2680 

Subsequently, and despite the aforementioned 
recommendation related to Abd al-Karim and a 
recommendation from a regional medical officer that Abu 
Hazim avoid any weight-bearing activities for five 
weeks, 2681 interrogators sought and received approval to 
use standing sleep deprivation on al-Karim and Abu 
Hazim. 2682 

Abu Hazim underwent 52 hours of standing sleep 
deprivation, 2683 and Abd al-Karim underwent an 
unspecified period of standing sleep deprivation. 2684 



44147 







37152 (2314 








1 37410(2918282 APR 03); 






38161 (13 1326Z MAY 03); DIRECTOR 

39582 (041743Z JUN 03); 

38365 (170652ZMAY 03) 



37754 



MAY 03); DIRECTOR 
39656 (060955Z JUN 03) 



Page 492 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 
















UNCLASSIFIED 




Interrogators left Asadullah, a detainee with a sprained 
ankle, in the standing sleep deprivation position. When 
Asadullah was subsequently placed in a stress position on 
his knees, he complained of discomfort and asked to sit. 
He was told he could not sit unless he answered questions 
truthfully. 2685 

Due to a lack of adequate medical care at CIA detention 
sites and the unwillingness of host governments to make 
hospital facilities available, CIA detainees had care 
delayed for serious medical issues. See, for example, the 
detainee reviews for Janat Gul, Hassan Guleed, Mustafa 
al-Hawsawi, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, and Firas al- Yemeni in 
Volume III. 



Dietary Manipulation 


DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “And, 
in the section [of the ICRC 
report] on medical care, the 
report omits key contextual facts. 
For example, Abu Zubaydah’s 
statement that he was given only 
Ensure and water for two to three 
weeks fails to mention the fact 
that he was on a liquid diet [was] 
quite appropriate because he was 
recovering from abdominal 
surgery at the time." 


This testimony is inaccurate. CIA records detail how Abu 
Zubaydah was fed solid food shortly after being 
discharged from the hospital in April 2002. 2686 In August 
2002, as part of the CIA’s enhanced interrogation 
techniques, Abu Zubaydah was placed on a liquid diet of 
Ensure and water as both an interrogation technique, and 
as a means of limiting vomiting during waterboarding. 2687 
In planning for the interrogation of subsequent detainees, 
the CIA determined that it would use a “liquid diet.” 2688 
At least 30 CIA detainees were fed only a liquid diet of 
Ensure and water for interrogation purposes. 2689 


Waterboarding and Its Effectiveness 


SENATOR HATCH: “So this is 
not tipping the board and putting 
his head underneath the water.” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “No. 
It’s slightly inclined, cloth, 


This testimony is incongruent with CIA interrogation 
records. As described in the Study, the waterboarding of 
KSM involved interrogators using their hands to maintain 
a one-inch deep “pool” of water over KSM’s nose and 
mouth in an effort to make it impossible for KSM to ingest 
all the water being poured on him. 2690 According to the 



2085 Asadullah was also placed in a “small isolation box” for 30 minutes, without authori zation and without 
discussion of how the technique would affect his ankle. 34 




Iney 


beans 


Imre 






ral c 


ups of 


hot t< 


sa. See | 





Page 493 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 









pouring of water under the rules I attending medical officer, the technique became a “series 

just laid out. Senator.” of near drownings.” 2691 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: This testimony is incongruent with CIA interrogation 

“ [W ] ate rboardi ng cannot take records. For example, KSM was waterboarded on nine 

place any more than five days out separate days over a two-week period. On March 13, 
of a total of 30 days. There 2003, KSM was subjected to three waterboard sessions in 

cannot be more than two sessions one day. Over March 12-13, 2003, he was subjected to 

per day. A session is described five waterboard sessions in 25 hours. During that same 

as being strapped to the board. period, he was subjected to the pouring of water for more 

No session can last longer than than twelve minutes during a 24-hour period. 2692 
two hours. In any session, there 

can be no more than six pourings In regard to the description of “pouring,” a CIA record 
of the water greater than ten related to Abu Zubaydah states that: 

seconds in duration. Under no 

circumstances can any detainee “Each iteration of the watering cycle consisted 

be under the pouring of the water of four broad steps: 1) demands for 

a total of more than twelve information interspersed with the application 

minutes in any 24-hour period, of the water just short of blocking his airway 

and one pouring cannot exceed, 2) escalation of the amount of water applied 

one application cannot exceed 40 until it blocked his airway and he started to 

seconds.” have involuntary spasms 3) raising the water- 

board to clear subject’s airway 4) lowering of 
the water-board and return to demands for 

information.” 2693 

SENATOR NELSON: “On This testimony is incongruent with CIA interrogation 

KSM, was it waterboarding that records. CIA personnel — including members of KSM’s 
you were able to get the interrogation team — believed that the waterboard 

information from him?” interrogation technique was ineffective on KSM. 2694 The 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “Yes, on-site medical officer told the inspector general that, after 
sir, it was." three or four days, it became apparent that the waterboard 

SENATOR NELSON: was ineffective, and that KSM “hated it but knew he could 

“Although it took you a long manage.” 2695 KSM interrogator told the 

time to break him?” 

[REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, May 15, 2003. See also interview of hy 

[REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Offic^Dh^nspecto^eneral^^a^^^003^^^ 

Email from: to: cc: IHMHHHUli’ subject: More; date: April 

10, 2003, at 5: 59: 27 PM. 

26 92 ■■ 10800 (131909Z MAR 03); HU 10801 (131918Z MAR 03); 10802 (13I921ZMAR 

03);^HH 10803 (13I929Z MAR 03) 

2693 CIA record entitled, “Aggressive Interrogation Phase Synopsis,” Abu Zubaydah, August 2002. 

2694 Similarly, participants in the interrogation of Abu Zubaydah wrote that Abu Zubaydah “probably reached the 
point of cooperation even prior to the August institution of ‘enhanced’ measures -a development missed because of 
the narrow focus of the questioning. In any event there was no evidence that the waterboard produced time- 
perishable information which otherwise would have been unobtainable.” See CIA Summary and Reflections of 
■H^dical SemcesonOMSparticipation in the RDI program, at 41. 

2695 Interview °f iHIIHHiilHi’ by [REDACTED] and [REDACTED], Office of the Inspector General, May 
15, 2003. 




Page 494 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 














UNCLASSIFIED 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “He had 
nine separate days in which 
waterboarding took place. He 
also was subjected] to sleep 
deprivation and I believe his 
deprivation was the longest of 
any detainee’s, at one stretch, and 
I think that may be what Senator 
Hatch was referring to by that 
180 number. That’s the number 
of hours at one stretch.” 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “The 
most serious injury that I’m 
aware of - and I’ll ask the 
experts to add any color they 
want, Senator - is bruising as a 
result of shackling.” 



inspector general that KSM had “beat the system,” 2696 and 
assessed two months after the discontinuation of the 
waterboard that KSM responded to “creature comforts and 
sense of importance” and not to “confrontational” 
approaches. 269 7 KSM debriefer an d Deputy Chief of 
ALEC Station 111^1^11^1 told the inspector 
general that KSM “figured out a way to de al with [ the 
g^icTC Legal, flB! 
mmm told the inspector general that the 
waterboard “was of limited use on KSM.” 2699 CI A 
records indicate that KSM was subjected to the waterboard 
interrogation technique at least 183 times. 



Injuries and Deaths 



This testimony is incongruent with CIA interrogation 
records. CIA records indicate that CIA detainees suffered 
physical injuries beyond bruising from shackling, as well 
as psychological problems: 

• During a waterboard session, Abu Zubaydah “became 
completely unresponsive, with bubbles rising through 
his open, full mouth.” He remained unresponsive after 
the waterboard was rotated upwards and only regained 
consciousness after receiving a “xyphoid thrust.” 2700 



Multiple CIA detainees subjected to prolonged sleep 
deprivation experienced hallucinations, and CIA 
interrogation teams did not always discontinue sleep 
deprivation after the detainees had experienced 
hallucinations. 2701 





i Zubaydah “li 










“I’m ostracize 




suggest those two did not tell us everyth 


ing.” See Sametime G 




ation. ■ 


i mu 












Itm Interview of 


ifmm by [REDACTED! and [REDA< 


CTED], Office of thel 


nspector < 


jeneral. 










ing the M 


EBifcrfr 


stuff. . . and tin 


e emails.” Se< 


s Sametime Communication, MHI 


HBI i and [REDAC 


TED], 02/ 









1 





JAN 04); 






1299 ( 



/ 


\( 


X 


eptable lower 


C 


a 


E 


D] and 


ei 


m 


ai 


1 from H 


E 


D 




, subject: Re: 






Page 495 of 499 

UNCLASSIFIED 























UNCLASSIFIED 




SENATOR LEVIN: “Did 
anybody die?” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “No.” 
SENATOR LEVIN: “Notone 
person?” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “No 
one. The Committee is aware 
that there was an individual who 
died in CIA custody prior to the 
initiation of this program.” 
SENATOR LEVIN: “Prior to 
the initiation of what?” 
DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “This 
program. In fact, the discipline 
of this program is a product of or 



• Some detainees exhibited significant bruising and 
swelling unrelated to shackling. For example, a 
medical officer noted that, in addition to the swelling 
of his ankles and wrists, Ramzi bin al-Shibh had a 
bruise on his brow. 2702 

• During the application of the CIA’s enhanced 
interrogation techniques, KSM was described as 
“[tjired and sore,” with abrasions on his ankles, shins, 
and wrists, as well as on the back of his head. 2703 He 
also suffered from pedal edema 2704 resulting from 
extended standing. 2705 

• At the CIA’s DETENTION SITE COBALT, CIA 
interrogators used “rough takedowns,” described as 
taking a naked detainee outside of his cell, placing a 
hood over his head, and dragging him up and down a 
long corridor while slapping and punching him. Gul 
Rahman, after his death, was found to have surface 
abrasions on his shoulders, pelvis, arms, legs, and 
face. 2706 



This testimony is incongruent with CIA records. 

• Gul Rahman died in CIA custody at the CIA’s 
DETENTION SITE COBALT after being rendered 
there on November 2002. At the time, 
DETENTION SITE COBALT was described as a 
place where the CIA could detain suspected terrorists 
for the purposes of “intense interrogations” by CIA 
officers. 2707 DDO James Pavitt told the inspector 
general that “there were some who say that 
[DETENTION SITE COBALT) is not a CIA facility, 
but that is ‘bullshit.’” 2708 

• CIA records reveal that Gul Rahman was subjected to 
what the CIA chief of interrogations described as 



10429 (101215Z FEB 03) 

10916 (210845Z MAR 03) 

2704 Swellingof the feet. 

2705 l0909 (20191 8Z MAR 03) 

2706 Memorandum for Deputy Director of Operations, from mH| January 28, 2003, Subject: Death 
Investigati on - Gul RAHMAN, pp. 21 -22. See Volume m for additional injuries resulting from CIA interrogations. 

ALEC ■■ 

2708 August 21, 2003, Interview Report of James Pavitt, (pursuant to 2003-7123-IG), Deputy Director of Operations. 



Page 496 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 











UNCLASSIFIED 



result of the undisciplined 
activity that took place earlier.” 

DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “[Gul 
Rahman] was not part of this 
program, but I understand it was 
in CIA custody.” 



SENATOR LEVIN: [Reading a 
SSCI staff document, “Summary 
Notes of the February 14, 2007 
ICRC Report”] “Prolonged 
stress standing position, naked, 
armed chained above the head [?] 



“coercive techniques without authorization.” 2709 At 
ALEC Station’s request, CIA contractor Hammond 
DUNBAR conducted an assessment of Gul Rahman to 
determine which CIA enhanced interrogation 
techniques should be used on him. 2710 While the 
CIA’s enhanced interrogation techniques were never 
authorized, DUNBAR interrogated Rahman, once 
employing the “insult slap” enhanced interrogation 
technique without CIA Headquarters approval. 2711 On 
November |, 2002, Gul Rahman was shackled to the 
wall of his cell in a short chain position, 2712 which 
required him to sit on the bare concrete. 2713 Rahman 
was wearing a sweatshirt, but was nude from the waist 
down. On November 2002, the guards at 
DETENTION SITE COBALT found Gul Rahman’s 
dead body. 2714 Although a CIA employee tried to 
perform CPR, Gul Rahman remained unresponsive 
and was declared dead. 2715 An autopsy report by the 
CIA found that the cause of Gul Rahman’s death was 
“undetermined,” but that the clinical impression of the 
medical officer who conducted the autopsy was that 
the cause of death was hypothermia. 2716 



Stress Positions 



This testimony is inaccurate. 

There are multiple descriptions of CIA detainees being 
forced to stand with their arms shackled above their heads 
for extended periods of time at the CIA’s DETENTION 
SITE COBALT. 2717 In one example, a U.S. military legal 




2952 

, to CTC/LGL Officer 
usinc coercive techniaues without authorization.” 



27,1 Report of Investigation, Death of a Detainee 
1957). 



; email dated November |, 2002, from CIA interrogator 
with the subject line, “Another example of field interrogation 



(2003-7402-IG), 27 April 2005, p. 23 (DTS #2005 



2712 In the short chain posi tion, a detainee’s han ds and feet are shackled together by a short chain. 

27.3 [REDACTED] 29520 ■■■■■ 

27.4 January 27, 2003, Memorandum from [REDACTED], Chief, Counterintelligence Evaluation Branch, 
Counterespionage Group Counterintelligence Center, to Deputy Director for Operations, Subject: Death 
Investigation - Gul Rahman. 

2715 January 27, 2003, Memorandum from [REDACTED], Chief, Counterintelligence Evaluation Branch, 

Counterespionage Group Counterintelligence Center, to Deputy Director for Operations, Subject: Death 
Investigation - Gul Rahman. The circumstances surrounding Gul Rahman’s death are described in detail in both 
reports prepared by the Counterintelligence Center and a 2005 report prepared bythelnspecfor General. See April 
27, 2005, CIA Inspector General, Report of Investigation, Death of a Detainee (DTS #2005-1957). 

2716 FINAL AUTOPSY FINDIN GS, b y [REDACTED], M D, CASE #: OMS A-01 -02. 

27,7 28246 HHHKlnterview Report, 2003-7123-IG, Review of 

Interrogations for Counterterrorism Purposes T^^^^^^BI' April 5, 2003; Inter view Report, 2003-7123-IG, 



Page 497 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 













UNCLASSIFIED 



DIRECTOR HAYDEN: “Not 
above the head. Stress positions 
are part of the EITs, and 



advisor observed the technique known as “hanging,” 
involving handcuffing one or both wrists to an overhead 
horizontal bar. The legal advisor noted that one detainee 



nakedness were part of the EITs, was apparently left hanging for 22 hours each day for two 
Senator.” consecutive days to “break” his resistance. 2718 

CIA records indicate that multiple detainees were shackled 
with their hands above their heads at other CIA detention 
sites. For example, see detainee reviews in Volume IK, to 
include ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, 2719 Hassan Ghul, 2720 
and KSM. 2721 According to CIA cables, Abu Zubaydah 
was handcuffed “high on the bars.” 2722 

Draft OMS guidelines on interrogations, noted that 
detainees could be shackled with their arms above their 
heads for “roughly two hours without great concern,” and 
that the arms could be elevated for between two and four 
hours if the detainee was monitored for “excessive 
distress.” 2723 



Legal Reasons for Overseas Detention 



SENATOR WHITEHOUSE: 
“Has there been any 
consideration at any point within 
the Agency that the purpose in 
locating facilities overseas is 
either to avoid liability under 



Mr. Rizzo’s testimony is incongrue nt with CI A records. 
Aftej^h^apUn^f Abu Zubaydah, HHICTC Legal, 
prepared a PowerPoint presentation 
laying out the “pros” and “cons” of six detention options. 
The pros for detention in Country |, where Abu 
Zubaydah would be rendered, included “[n]o issues of 



American statutes or to avoid the possible U.S. [court] jurisdiction.” The cons for a CIA 



ability of any court to claim 
jurisdiction because they would 
not know where these took 
lace? Is there an element of 



facility in the United States included “[c]an’t foreclose 
ability of U.S. [courts] considering Habeas Corpus 
petition.” 2724 






OMS G 

ERROG, 

PowerPo 












Page 498 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 















providing legal defense to the In late 2003 and early 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court’s 
participants in these decision to accept certiorari in the case of Rasul v. Bush 

applications?” prompted a decision by the CIA, in coordination with the 

MR. RIZZO: “Well, certainly Department of Justice, to transfer five CIA detainees held 
not the first.” at Guantanamo to other CIA detention facilities. 2725 



2725 Email from: Scott W. Muller; to: [REDACTED]; cc: [REDACTED]; subject: Detainees in 

Gitmo; date: January ^2004; email from Scott W. Muller; to: [REDACTEDJ^ubject: DCI Meeting with Rice; 
date: January((2004; email from: Scott Muller^tojJamesPa^ cc: GeoreeTenet, John 

McLaughlin, [REDACTED], [REDACTED], H|^BBH^Bf[REDACTED], subject: CIA 

Detainees at GITMO; date: February B2004. 



Page 499 of 499 



UNCLASSIFIED 








